Faced with the immensity of what we have learned about cell biology, it might be tempting for a student to imagine that there is little left to discover. In fact, the more we find out about cells, the more new questions emerge. To emphasize that our understanding of cell biology is incomplete, we have highlighted some of the major gaps in our knowledge by including What We Don’t Know at the end of each chapter. These brief lists include only a tiny sample of the critical unanswered questions and challenges for the next generation of scientists. We derive great pleasure from the knowledge that some of our readers will provide future answers.
The more than 1500 illustrations have been designed to create a parallel narrative, closely interwoven with the text. We have increased their consistency between chapters, particularly in the use of color and of common icons; membrane pumps and channels are a good example. To avoid interruptions to the text, some material has been moved into new, readily accessible panels. Most of the important protein structures depicted have now been redrawn and consistently colored. In each case, we now provide the corresponding Protein Data Bank (PDB) code for the protein, which can be used to access online tools that provide more information about it, such as those on the RCSB PDB website (www.rcsb.org). These connections allow readers of the book to explore more fully the proteins that lie at the core of cell biology.
John Wilson and Tim Hunt have again contributed their distinctive and imaginative problems to help students gain a more active understanding of the text. The problems emphasize quantitative approaches and encourage critical thinking about published experiments; they are now present at the end of all chapters. The answers to these problems, plus more than 1800 additional problems and solutions, all appear in the companion volume that John and Tim have written, Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition: The Problems Book.
We live in a world that presents us with many complex issues related to cell biology: biodiversity, climate change, food security, environmental degradation, resource depletion, and human disease. We hope that our textbook will help the reader better understand and possibly contribute to meeting these challenges. Knowledge and understanding bring the power to intervene.