Preface
Since the last edition of this book appeared, more than five million scientific papers have been published. There has been a parallel increase in the quantity of digital information: new data on genome sequences, protein interactions, molecular structures, and gene expression—all stored in vast databases. The challenge, for both scientists and textbook writers, is to convert this overwhelming amount of information into an accessible and up-to-date understanding of how cells work.
Help comes from a large increase in the number of review articles that attempt to make raw material easier to digest, although the vast majority of these reviews are still quite narrowly focused. Meanwhile, a rapidly growing collection of online resources tries to convince us that understanding is only a few mouse-clicks away. In some areas this change in the way we access knowledge has been highly successful—in discovering the latest information about our own medical problems, for example. But to understand something of the beauty and complexity of how living cells work, one needs more than just a wiki-this or wiki-that; it is enormously hard to identify the valuable and enduring gems from so much confusing landfill. Much more effective is a carefully wrought narrative that leads logically and progressively through the key ideas, components, and experiments in such a way that readers can build for themselves a memorable, conceptual framework for cell biology— a framework that will allow them to critically evaluate all of the new science and, more importantly, to understand it. That is what we have tried to do in Molecular Biology of the Cell.
In preparing this new edition, we have inevitably had to make some difficult decisions. In order to incorporate exciting new discoveries, while at the same time keeping the book portable, much has had to be excised. We have added new sections, such as those on new RNA functions, advances in stem cell biology, new methods for studying proteins and genes and for imaging cells, advances in the genetics and treatment of cancer, and timing, growth control, and morphogenesis in development.
The chemistry of cells is extremely complex, and any list of cell parts and their interactions—no matter how complete—will leave huge gaps in our understanding. We now realize that to produce convincing explanations of cell behavior will require quantitative information about cells that is coupled to sophisticated mathematical/computational approaches—some not yet invented. As a consequence, an emerging goal for cell biologists is to shift their studies more toward quantitative description and mathematical deduction. We highlight this approach and some of its methods in a new section at the end of Chapter 8.