Note to the Reader
Structure of the Book
Although the chapters of this book can be read independently of one another, they are arranged in a logical sequence of five parts. The first three chapters of Part I cover elementary principles and basic biochemistry. They can serve either as an introduction for those who have not studied biochemistry or as a refresher course for those who have. Part II deals with the storage, expression, and transmission of genetic information. Part III presents the principles of the main experimental methods for investigating and analyzing cells; here, a new section entitled “Mathematical Analysis of Cell Functions” in Chapter 8 provides an extra dimension in our understanding of cell regulation and function. Part IV describes the internal organization of the cell. Part V follows the behavior of cells in multicellular systems, starting with development of multicellular organisms and concluding with chapters on pathogens and infection and on the innate and adaptive immune systems.
End-of-Chapter Problems
A selection of problems, written by John Wilson and Tim Hunt, appears in the text at the end of each chapter. New to this edition are problems for the last four chapters on multicellular organisms. The complete solutions to all of these problems can be found in Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition: The Problems Book.
References
A concise list of selected references is included at the end of each chapter. These are arranged in alphabetical order under the main chapter section headings. These references sometimes include the original papers in which important discoveries were first reported.
Glossary Terms
Throughout the book, boldface type has been used to highlight key terms at the point in a chapter where the main discussion occurs. Italic type is used to set off important terms with a lesser degree of emphasis. At the end of the book is an expanded glossary, covering technical terms that are part of the common currency of cell biology; it should be the first resort for a reader who encounters an unfamiliar term. The complete glossary as well as a set of flashcards is available on the Student Website.
Nomenclature for Genes and Proteins
Each species has its own conventions for naming genes; the only common feature is that they are always set in italics. In some species (such as humans), gene names are spelled out all in capital letters; in other species (such as zebrafish), all in lowercase; in yet others (most mouse genes), with the first letter in uppercase and rest in lowercase; or (as in Drosophila) with different combinations of uppercase and lowercase, according to whether the first mutant allele to be discovered produced a dominant or recessive phenotype. Conventions for naming protein products are equally varied.