The Problems Book is designed to help students appreciate the ways in which experiments and simple calculations can lead to an understanding of how cells work. It provides problems to accompany Chapters 1–20 of Molecular Biology of the Cell. Each chapter of problems is divided into sections that correspond to those of the main textbook and review key terms, test for understanding basic concepts, pose research-based problems, and now include M-CAT-style questions which help students to prepare for standardized medical school admission tests. Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition: The Problems Book should be useful for homework assignments and as a basis for class discussion. It could even provide ideas for exam questions. Solutions for all of the problems are provided in the book. Solutions for the end-of-chapter problems for Chapters 1–24 in the main textbook are also found in The Problems Book.
RESOURCES FOR INSTRUCTORS AND STUDENTS
The teaching and learning resources for instructors and students are available online. The instructor’s resources are password-protected and available only to adopting instructors. The student resources are available to everyone. We hope these resources will enhance student learning and make it easier for instructors to prepare dynamic lectures and activities for the classroom.
Instructor Resources
Instructor Resources are available on the Garland Science Instructor’s Resource Site, located at www.garlandscience.com/instructors. The website provides access not only to the teaching resources for this book but also to all other Garland Science textbooks. Adopting instructors can obtain access to the site from their sales representative or by emailing science@garland.com.
Art of Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition
The images from the book are available in two convenient formats: PowerPoint and JPEG. They have been optimized for display on a computer. Figures are searchable by figure number, by figure name, or by keywords used in the figure legend from the book.
Figure-Integrated Lecture Outlines
The section headings, concept headings, and figures from the text have been integrated into PowerPoint presentations. These will be useful for instructors who would like a head start creating lectures for their course. Like all of our PowerPoint presentations, the lecture outlines can be customized. For example, the content of these presentations can be combined with videos and questions from the book or Question Bank, in order to create unique lectures that facilitate interactive learning.