Animations and Videos
The 174 animations and videos that are available to students are also available on the Instructor’s Website in two formats. The WMV-formatted movies are created for instructors who wish to use the movies in PowerPoint presentations on Windows computers; the QuickTime-formatted movies are for use in PowerPoint for Apple computers or Keynote presentations. The movies can easily be downloaded using the “download” button on the movie preview page. The movies are correlated to each chapter and callouts are highlighted in color.
Media Guide
This document provides an overview to the multimedia available for students and instructors and contains the text of the voice-over narration for all of the movies.
Question Bank
Written by Hossein Amiri, University of California, Santa Cruz, this greatly expanded question bank includes a variety of question formats: multiple choice, short answer, fill-in-the-blank, true-false, and matching. There are 35–60 questions per chapter, and a large number of the multiple-choice questions will be suitable for use with personal response systems (that is, clickers). The Question Bank was created with the philosophy that a good exam should do much more than simply test students’ ability to memorize information; it should require them to reflect upon and integrate information as a part of a sound understanding. This resource provides a comprehensive sampling of questions that can be used either directly or as inspiration for instructors to write their own test questions.
Diploma Test Generator Software
The questions from the Question Bank have been loaded into the Diploma Test Generator software. The software is easy to use and can scramble questions to create multiple tests. Questions are organized by chapter and type and can be additionally categorized by the instructor according to difficulty or subject. Existing questions can be edited and new ones added. The Test Generator is compatible with several course management systems, including Blackboard.
Medical Topics Guide
This document highlights medically relevant topics covered throughout Molecular Biology of the Cell and The Problems Book. It will be particularly useful for instructors with a large number of premedical, health science, or nursing students.
Blackboard and Learning Management System (LMS) Integration
The movies, book images, and student assessments that accompany the book can be integrated into Blackboard or other LMSs. These resources are bundled into a “Common Cartridge” or “Upload Package” that facilitates bulk uploading of textbook resources into Blackboard and other LMSs. The LMS Common Cartridge can be obtained on a DVD from your sales representative or by emailing science@garland.com.
Resources for Students
The resources for students are available on the Molecular Biology of the Cell Student Website, located at www.garlandscience.com/MBOC6-students.