This typographical chaos drives everyone crazy. It is not just tiresome and absurd; it is also unsustainable. We cannot independently define a fresh convention for each of the next few million species whose genes we may wish to study Moreover, there are many occasions, especially in a book such as this, where we need to refer to a gene generically—without specifying the mouse version, the human version, the chick version, or the hippopotamus version—because they are all equivalent for the purposes of our discussion. What convention then should we use?
We have decided in this book to cast aside the different conventions that are used in individual species and follow a uniform rule: we write all gene names, like the names of people and places, with the first letter in uppercase and the rest in lowercase, but all in italics, thus: Apc, Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. The corresponding protein, where it is named after the gene, will be written in the same way, but in roman rather than italic letters: Apc, Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. When it is necessary to specify the organism, this can be done with a prefix to the gene name.
For completeness, we list a few further details of naming rules that we shall follow. In some instances, an added letter in the gene name is traditionally used to distinguish between genes that are related by function or evolution; for those genes, we put that letter in uppercase if it is usual to do so (Lac Z, Rec A, Hox A4). We use no hyphen to separate added letters or numbers from the rest of the name. Proteins are more of a problem. Many of them have names in their own right, assigned to them before the gene was named. Such protein names take many forms, although most of them traditionally begin with a lowercase letter (actin, hemoglobin, catalase), like the names of ordinary substances (cheese, nylon), unless they are acronyms (such as GFP, for Green Fluorescent Protein, or BMP4, for Bone Morphogenetic Protein #4). To force all such protein names into a uniform style would do too much violence to established usages, and we shall simply write them in the traditional way (actin, GFP, and so on). For the corresponding gene names in all these cases, we shall nevertheless follow our standard rule: Actin, Hemoglobin, Catalase, Bmp4, Gfp. Occasionally in our book we need to highlight a protein name by setting it in italics for emphasis; the intention will generally be clear from the context.
For those who wish to know them, the table below shows some of the official conventions for individual species—conventions that we shall mostly violate in this book, in the manner shown. 
Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition: The Problems Book
by John Wilson and Tim Hunt (ISBN: 978-0-8153-4453-7)