The freedom to be extravagant with DNA has had profound implications. Eukaryotes not only have more genes than prokaryotes; they also have vastly more DNA that does not code for protein. The human genome contains 1000 times as many nucleotide pairs as the genome of a typical bacterium, perhaps 10 times as many genes, and a great deal more noncoding DNA (~98.5% of the genome for a human does not code for proteins, as opposed to 11% of the genome for the bacterium E coli). The estimated genome sizes and gene numbers for some eukaryotes are compiled for easy comparison with E coli in Table 1–2; we shall discuss how each of these eukaryotes serves as a model organism shortly.
Eukaryotic Genomes Are Rich in Regulatory DNA
Much of our noncoding DNA is almost certainly dispensable junk, retained like a mass of old papers because, when there is little pressure to keep an archive small, it is easier to retain everything than to sort out the valuable information and discard the rest. Certain exceptional eukaryotic species, such as the puffer fish, bear witness to the profligacy of their relatives; they have somehow managed to rid themselves of large quantities of noncoding DNA. Yet they appear similar in structure, behavior, and fitness to related species that have vastly more such DNA (see Figure 4–71).
Even in compact eukaryotic genomes such as that of puffer fish, there is more noncoding DNA than coding DNA, and at least some of the noncoding DNA certainly has important functions. In particular, it regulates the expression of adjacent genes. With this regulatory DNA, eukaryotes have evolved distinctive ways of controlling when and where a gene is brought into play. This sophisticated gene regulation is crucial for the formation of complex multicellular organisms.
The Genome Defines the Program of Multicellular Development
The cells in an individual animal or plant are extraordinarily varied. Fat cells, skin cells, bone cells, nerve cells—they seem as dissimilar as any cells could be (Figure 1–33). Yet all these cell types are the descendants of a single fertilized egg cell, and all (with minor exceptions) contain identical copies of the genome of the species.
The differences result from the way in which the cells make selective use of their genetic instructions according to the cues they get from their surroundings in the developing embryo. The DNA is not just a shopping list specifying the molecules that every cell must have, and the cell is not an assembly of all the items on the list. Rather, the cell behaves as a multipurpose machine, with sensors to receive environmental signals and with highly developed abilities to call different sets of genes into action according to the sequences of signals to which the cell has been exposed. The genome in each cell is big enough to accommodate the information that specifies an entire multicellular organism, but in any individual cell only part of that information is used.