RNA molecules have distinctive structures that can also give them other specialized chemical capabilities. Being single-stranded, their backbone is flexible, so that the polymer chain can bend back on itself to allow one part of the molecule to form weak bonds with another part of the same molecule. This occurs when segments of the sequence are locally complementary: a ...GGGG... segment, for example, will tend to associate with a ...CCCC... segment. These types of internal associations can cause an RNA chain to fold up into a specific shape that is dictated by its sequence (Figure 1–6). The shape of the RNA molecule, in turn, may enable it to recognize other molecules by binding to them selectively—and even, in certain cases, to catalyze chemical changes in the molecules that are bound. In fact, some chemical reactions catalyzed by RNA molecules are crucial for several of the most ancient and fundamental processes in living cells, and it has been suggested that an extensive catalysis by RNA played a central part in the early evolution of life (discussed in Chapter 6).
All Cells Use Proteins as Catalysts
Protein molecules, like DNA and RNA molecules, are long unbranched polymer chains, formed by stringing together monomeric building blocks drawn from a standard repertoire that is the same for all living cells. Like DNA and RNA, proteins carry information in the form of a linear sequence of symbols, in the same way as a human message written in an alphabetic script. There are many different protein molecules in each cell, and—leaving out the water—they form most of the cell’s mass.
The monomers of protein, the amino acids, are quite different from those of DNA and RNA, and there are 20 types instead of 4. Each amino acid is built around the same core structure through which it can be linked in a standard way to any other amino acid in the set; attached to this core is a side group that gives each amino acid a distinctive chemical character. Each of the protein molecules is a polypeptide, created by joining its amino acids in a particular sequence. Through billions of years of evolution, this sequence has been selected to give the protein a useful function. Thus, by folding into a precise three-dimensional form with reactive sites on its surface (Figure 1–7A), these amino-acid polymers can bind with high specificity to other molecules and can act as enzymes to catalyze reactions that make or break covalent bonds. In this way they direct the vast majority of chemical processes in the cell (Figure 1–7B).
Proteins have many other functions as well—maintaining structures, generating movements, sensing signals, and so on—each protein molecule performing a specific function according to its own genetically specified sequence of amino acids. Proteins, above all, are the main molecules that put the cell’s genetic information into action.