S cerevisiae is a small, single-celled member of the kingdom of fungi and thus, according to modern views, is at least as closely related to animals as it is to plants. It is robust and easy to grow in a simple nutrient medium. Like other fungi, it has a tough cell wall, is relatively immobile, and possesses mitochondria but not chloroplasts. When nutrients are plentiful, it grows and divides almost as rapidly as a bacterium. It can reproduce either vegetatively (that is, by simple cell division), or sexually: two yeast cells that are haploid (possessing a single copy of the genome) can fuse to create a cell that is diploid (containing a double genome); and the diploid cell can undergo meiosis (a reduction division) to produce cells that are once again haploid (Figure 1–37). In contrast with higher plants and animals, the yeast can divide indefinitely in either the haploid or the diploid state, and the process leading from one state to the other can be induced at will by changing the growth conditions.
In addition to these features, the yeast has a further property that makes it a convenient organism for genetic studies: its genome, by eukaryotic standards, is exceptionally small. Nevertheless, it suffices for all the basic tasks that every eukaryotic cell must perform. Mutants are available for essentially every gene, and studies on yeasts (using both S cerevisiae and other species) have provided a key to many crucial processes, including the eukaryotic cell-division cycle—the critical chain of events by which the nucleus and all the other components of a cell are duplicated and parceled out to create two daughter cells from one. The control system that governs this process has been so well conserved over the course of evolution that many of its components can function interchangeably in yeast and human cells: if a mutant yeast lacking an essential yeast cell-division-cycle gene is supplied with a copy of the homologous cell-division-cycle gene from a human, the yeast is cured of its defect and becomes able to divide normally.
The Expression Levels of All the Genes of An Organism Can Be Monitored Simultaneously
The complete genome sequence of S cerevisiae, determined in 1997, consists of approximately 13,117,000 nucleotide pairs, including the small contribution (78,520 nucleotide pairs) of the mitochondrial DNA. This total is only about 2.5 times as much DNA as there is in E coli, and it codes for only 1.5 times as many distinct proteins (about 6600 in all). The way of life of S cerevisiae is similar in many ways to that of a bacterium, and it seems that this yeast has likewise been subject to selection pressures that have kept its genome compact.