Knowledge of the complete genome sequence of any organism—be it a yeast or a human—opens up new perspectives on the workings of the cell: things that once seemed impossibly complex now seem within our grasp. Using techniques described in Chapter 8, it is now possible, for example, to monitor, simultaneously, the amount of mRNA transcript that is produced from every gene in the yeast genome under any chosen conditions, and to see how this whole pattern of gene activity changes when conditions change. The analysis can be repeated with mRNA prepared from mutant cells lacking a chosen gene—any gene that we care to test. In principle, this approach provides a way to reveal the entire system of control relationships that govern gene expression—not only in yeast cells, but in any organism whose genome sequence is known.
Arabidopsis Has Been Chosen Out of 300,000 Species As a Model Plant
The large multicellular organisms that we see around us—the flowers and trees and animals—seem fantastically varied, but they are much closer to one another in their evolutionary origins, and more similar in their basic cell biology, than the great host of microscopic single-celled organisms. Thus, while bacteria and archaea are separated by perhaps 3.5 billion years of evolution, vertebrates and insects are separated by about 700 million years, fish and mammals by about 450 million years, and the different species of flowering plants by only about 150 million years.
Because of the close evolutionary relationship between all flowering plants, we can, once again, get insight into the cell and molecular biology of this whole class of organisms by focusing on just one or a few species for detailed analysis. Out of the several hundred thousand species of flowering plants on Earth today, molecular biologists have chosen to concentrate their efforts on a small weed, the common Thale cress Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1–38), which can be grown indoors in large numbers and produces thousands of offspring per plant after 8–10 weeks. Arabidopsis has a total genome size of approximately 220 million nucleotide pairs, about 17 times the size of yeast’s (see Table 1–2).
The World of Animal Cells Is Represented By a Worm, a Fly, a Fish, a Mouse, and a Human
Multicellular animals account for the majority of all named species of living organisms, and for the largest part of the biological research effort. Five species have emerged as the foremost model organisms for molecular genetic studies. In order of increasing size, they are the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, the fly Drosophila melanogaster, the zebrafish Danio rerio, the mouse Mus musculus, and the human, Homo sapiens. Each has had its genome sequenced.