Summary
Prokaryotes (cells without a distinct nucleus) are biochemically the most diverse organisms and include species that can obtain all their energy and nutrients from inorganic chemical sources, such as the reactive mixtures of minerals released at hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor—the sort of diet that may have nourished the first living cells 3.5 billion years ago. DNA sequence comparisons reveal the family relationships of living organisms and show that the prokaryotes fall into two groups that diverged early in the course of evolution: the bacteria (or eubacteria) and the archaea. Together with the eukaryotes (cells with a membrane-enclosed nucleus), these constitute the three primary branches of the tree of life.
Most bacteria and archaea are small unicellular organisms with compact genomes comprising 1000–6000 genes. Many of the genes within a single organism show strong family resemblances in their DNA sequences, implying that they originated from the same ancestral gene through gene duplication and divergence. Family resemblances (homologies) are also clear when gene sequences are compared between different species, and more than 200 gene families have been so highly conserved that they can be recognized as common to most species from all three domains of the living world. Thus, given the DNA sequence of a newly discovered gene, it is often possible to deduce the gene’s function from the known function of a homologous gene in an intensively studied model organism, such as the bacterium E coli.
Genetic Information in Eukaryotes
Eukaryotic cells, in general, are bigger and more elaborate than prokaryotic cells, and their genomes are bigger and more elaborate, too. The greater size is accompanied by radical differences in cell structure and function. Moreover, many classes of eukaryotic cells form multicellular organisms that attain levels of complexity unmatched by any prokaryote.
Because they are so complex, eukaryotes confront molecular biologists with a special set of challenges that will concern us in the rest of this book. Increasingly, biologists attempt to meet these challenges through the analysis and manipulation of the genetic information within cells and organisms. It is therefore important at the outset to know something of the special features of the eukaryotic genome. We begin by briefly discussing how eukaryotic cells are organized, how this reflects their way of life, and how their genomes differ from those of prokaryotes. This leads us to an outline of the strategy by which cell biologists, by exploiting genetic and biochemical information, are attempting to discover how eukaryotic organisms work.