Sex Results in Horizontal Exchanges of Genetic Information Within a Species
Horizontal gene transfer among prokaryotes has a parallel in a phenomenon familiar to us all: sex. In addition to the usual vertical transfer of genetic material from parent to offspring, sexual reproduction causes a large-scale horizontal transfer of genetic information between two initially separate cell lineages—those of the father and the mother. A key feature of sex, of course, is that the genetic exchange normally occurs only between individuals of the same species. But no matter whether they occur within a species or between species, horizontal gene transfers leave a characteristic imprint: they result in individuals who are related more closely to one set of relatives with respect to some genes, and more closely to another set of relatives with respect to others. By comparing the DNA sequences of individual human genomes, an intelligent visitor from outer space could deducethat humans reproduce sexually, even if it knew nothing about human behavior.
Sexual reproduction is widespread (although not universal), especially among eukaryotes. Even bacteria indulge from time to time in controlled sexual exchanges of DNA with other members of their own species. Natural selection has clearly favored organisms that can reproduce sexually, although evolutionary theorists dispute precisely what that selective advantage is.
The Function of a Gene Can Often Be Deduced from Its Sequence
Family relationships among genes are important not just for their historical interest, but because they simplify the task of deciphering gene functions. Once the sequence of a newly discovered gene has been determined, a scientist can tap a few keys on a computer to search the entire database of known gene sequences for genes related to it. In many cases, the function of one or more of these homologs will have been already determined experimentally. Since gene sequence determines gene function, one can frequently make a good guess at the function of the new gene: it is likely to be similar to that of the already known homologs.
In this way, it is possible to decipher a great deal of the biology of an organism simply by analyzing the DNA sequence of its genome and using the information we already have about the functions of genes in other organisms that have been more intensively studied.