The Mouse Is the Predominant Mammalian Model Organism
Mammals have typically two times as many genes as Drosophila, a genome that is 16 times larger, and millions or billions of times as many cells in their adult bodies. In terms of genome size and function, cell biology, and molecular mechanisms, mammals are nevertheless a highly uniform group of organisms. Even anatomically, the differences among mammals are chiefly a matter of size and proportions; it is hard to think of a human body part that does not have a counterpart in elephants and mice, and vice versa. Evolution plays freely with quantitative features, but it does not readily change the logic of the structure.
For a more exact measure of how closely mammalian species resemble one another genetically, we can compare the nucleotide sequences of corresponding (orthologous) genes, or the amino acid sequences of the proteins that these genes encode. The results for individual genes and proteins vary widely. But typically, if we line up the amino acid sequence of a human protein with that of the orthologous protein from, say, an elephant, about 85% of the amino acids are identical. A similar comparison between human and bird shows an amino acid identity of about 70%—twice as many differences, because the bird and the mammalian lineages have had twice as long to diverge as those of the elephant and the human (Figure 1–45).
The mouse, being small, hardy, and a rapid breeder, has become the foremost model organism for experimental studies of vertebrate molecular genetics. Many naturally occurring mutations are known, often mimicking the effects of corresponding mutations in humans (Figure 1–46). Methods have been developed, moreover, to test the function of any chosen mouse gene, or of any noncoding portion of the mouse genome, by artificially creating mutations in it, as we explain later in the book.
Just one made-to-order mutant mouse can provide a wealth of information for the cell biologist. It reveals the effects of the chosen mutation in a host of different contexts, simultaneously testing the action of the gene in all the different kinds of cells in the body that could in principle be affected.