In more recent times, Drosophila, more than any other organism, has shown us how to trace the chain of cause and effect from the genetic instructions encoded in the chromosomal DNA to the structure of the adult multicellular body. Drosophila mutants with body parts strangely misplaced or mispatterned provided the key to the identification and characterization of the genes required to make a properly structured body, with gut, limbs, eyes, and all the other parts in their correct places. Once these Drosophila genes were sequenced, the genomes of vertebrates could be scanned for homologs. These were found, and their functions in vertebrates were then tested by analyzing mice in which the genes had been mutated. The results, as we see later in the book, reveal an astonishing degree of similarity in the molecular mechanisms that govern insect and vertebrate development (discussed in Chapter 21).
The majority of all named species of living organisms are insects. Even if Drosophila had nothing in common with vertebrates, but only with insects, it would still be an important model organism. But if understanding the molecular genetics of vertebrates is the goal, why not simply tackle the problem head-on? Why sidle up to it obliquely, through studies in Drosophila?
Drosophila requires only 9 days to progress from a fertilized egg to an adult; it is vastly easier and cheaper to breed than any vertebrate, and its genome is much smaller—about 200 million nucleotide pairs, compared with 3200 million for a human. This genome codes for about 15,000 proteins, and mutants can now be obtained for essentially any gene. But there is also another, deeper reason why genetic mechanisms that are hard to discover in a vertebrate are often readily revealed in the fly. This relates, as we now explain, to the frequency of gene duplication, which is substantially greater in vertebrate genomes than in the fly genome and has probably been crucial in making vertebrates the complex and subtle creatures that they are.
The Vertebrate Genome Is a Product of Repeated Duplications
Almost every gene in the vertebrate genome has paralogs—other genes in the same genome that are unmistakably related and must have arisen by gene duplication. In many cases, a whole cluster of genes is closely related to similar clusters present elsewhere in the genome, suggesting that genes have been duplicated in linked groups rather than as isolated individuals. According to one hypothesis, at an early stage in the evolution of the vertebrates, the entire genome underwent duplication twice in succession, giving rise to four copies of every gene.