A Living Cell Can Exist with Fewer Than 500 Genes
The basic principles of biological information transfer are simple enough, but how complex are real living cells? In particular, what are the minimum requirements? We can get a rough indication by considering a species that has one of the smallest known genomes—the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium (Figure 1–10). This organism lives as a parasite in mammals, and its environment provides it with many of its small molecules ready-made. Nevertheless, it still has to make all the large molecules—DNA, RNAs, and proteins—required for the basic processes of heredity. It has about 530 genes, about 400 of which are essential. Its genome of 580,070 nucleotide pairs represents 145,018 bytes of information—about as much as it takes to record the text of one chapter of this book. Cell biology may be complicated, but it is not impossibly so.
The minimum number of genes for a viable cell in today’s environments is probably not less than 300, although there are only about 60 genes in the core set that is shared by all living species.
Summary
The individual cell is the minimal self-reproducing unit of living matter, and it consists of a self-replicating collection of catalysts. Central to this reproduction is the transmission of genetic information to progeny cells. Every cell on our planet stores its genetic information in the same chemical form—as double-stranded DNA. The cell replicates its information by separating the paired DNA strands and using each as a template for polymerization to make a new DNA strand with a complementary sequence of nucleotides. The same strategy of templated polymerization is used to transcribe portions of the information from DNA into molecules of the closely related polymer, RNA. These RNA molecules in turn guide the synthesis of protein molecules by the more complex machinery of translation, involving a large multimolecular machine, the ribosome. Proteins are the principal catalysts for almost all the chemical reactions in the cell; their other functions include the selective import and export of small molecules across the plasma membrane that forms the cell’s boundary. The specific function of each protein depends on its amino acid sequence, which is specified by the nucleotide sequence of a corresponding segment of the DNA—the gene that codes for that protein. In this way, the genome of the cell determines its chemistry; and the chemistry of every living cell is fundamentally similar, because it must provide for the synthesis of DNA, RNA, and protein. The simplest known cells can survive with about 400 genes.