4. Horizontal (intercellular) transfer: a piece of DNA can be transferred from the genome of one cell to that of another—even to that of another species. This process is in contrast with the usual vertical transfer of genetic information from parent to progeny.
Each of these types of change leaves a characteristic trace in the DNA sequence of the organism, and there is clear evidence that all four processes have frequently occurred. In later chapters, we discuss the underlying mechanisms, but for the present we focus on the consequences.
Gene Duplications Give Rise to Families of Related Genes Within a Single Cell
A cell duplicates its entire genome each time it divides into two daughter cells. However, accidents occasionally result in the inappropriate duplication of just part of the genome, with retention of original and duplicate segments in a single cell. Once a gene has been duplicated in this way, one of the two gene copies is free to mutate and become specialized to perform a different function within the same cell. Repeated rounds of this process of duplication and divergence, over many millions of years, have enabled one gene to give rise to a family of genes that may all be found within a single genome. Analysis of the DNA sequence of prokaryotic genomes reveals many examples of such gene families: in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, for example, 47% of the genes have one or more obvious relatives (Figure 1–20).
When genes duplicate and diverge in this way, the individuals of one species become endowed with multiple variants of a primordial gene. This evolutionary process has to be distinguished from the genetic divergence that occurs when one species of organism splits into two separate lines of descent at a branch point in the family tree—when the human line of descent became separate from that of chimpanzees, for example. There, the genes gradually become different in the course of evolution, but they are likely to continue to have corresponding functions in the two sister species. Genes that are related by descent in this way—that is, genes in two separate species that derive from the same ancestral gene in the last common ancestor of those two species—are called orthologs. Related genes that have resulted from a gene duplication event within a single genome—and are likely to have diverged in their function—are called paralogs. Genes that are related by descent in either way are called homologs, a general term used to cover both types of relationship (Figure 1–21).