GTP-binding proteins (also called GTP-aces because of the GTP hydrolysis they catalyze) comprise a large family of proteins that all contain variations on the same GTP-binding globular domain. When a tightly bound GTP is hydrolyzed by the GTP-binding protein to GDP, this domain undergoes a conformational change that inactivates the protein. The three-dimensional structure of a prototypical member of this family, the monomeric GTP-ace called Ras, is shown in Figure 3–67.
The Ras protein has an important role in cell signaling (discussed in Chapter 15). In its GTP-bound form, it is active and stimulates a cascade of protein phosphorylations in the cell. Most of the time, however, the protein is in its inactive, GDP-bound form. It becomes active when it exchanges its GDP for a GTP molecule in response to extracellular signals, such as growth factors, that bind to receptors in the plasma membrane (see Figure 15–47).
Regulatory Proteins GAP and GEF Control the Activity of GTP-Binding Proteins by Determining Whether GTP or GDP Is Bound
GTP-binding proteins are controlled by regulatory proteins that determine whether GTP or GDP is bound, just as phosphorylated proteins are turned on and off by protein kinases and protein phosphatases. Thus, Ras is inactivated by a GTP-ace-activating protein (GAP), which binds to the Ras protein and induces Ras to hydrolyze its bound GTP molecule to GDP—which remains tightly bound—and inorganic phosphate (P i), which is rapidly released. The Ras protein stays in its inactive, GDP-bound conformation until it encounters a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), which binds to GDP-Ras and causes Ras to release its GDP. Because the empty nucleotide-binding site is immediately filled by a GTP molecule (GTP is present in large excess over GDP in cells), the GEF activates Ras by indirectly adding back the phosphate removed by GTP hydrolysis. Thus, in a sense, the roles of GAP and GEF are analogous to those of a protein phosphatase and a protein kinase, respectively (Figure 3–68).
Proteins Can Be Regulated by the Covalent Addition of Other Proteins
Cells contain a special family of small proteins whose members are covalently attached to many other proteins to determine the activity or fate of the second protein. In each case, the carboxyl end of the small protein becomes linked to the amino group of a lysine side chain of a “target” protein through an isopeptide bond. The first such protein discovered, and the most abundantly used, is ubiquitin (Figure 3–69A). Ubiquitin can be covalently attached to target proteins in a variety of ways, each of which has a different meaning for cells.