A helix is an unexceptional structure, and it is generated simply by placing many similar subunits next to each other, each in the same strictly repeated relationship to the one before—that is, with a fixed rotation followed by a fixed translation along the helix axis, as in a spiral staircase.
Many Protein Molecules Have Elongated, Fibrous Shapes
Enzymes tend to be globular proteins: even though many are large and complicated, with multiple subunits, most have an overall rounded shape. In Figure 3–21, we saw that a globular protein can also associate to form long filaments. But there are also functions that require each individual protein molecule to span a large distance. These proteins generally have a relatively simple, elongated three-dimensional structure and are commonly referred to as fibrous proteins.
One large family of intracellular fibrous proteins consists of α-keratin, introduced when we presented the α helix, and its relatives. Keratin filaments are extremely stable and are the main component in long-lived structures such as hair, horns, and nails. An α-keratin molecule is a dimer of two identical subunits, with the long α helices of each subunit forming a coiled-coil (see Figure 3–9). The coiled-coil regions are capped at each end by globular domains containing binding sites. This enables this class of protein to assemble into ropelike intermediate filaments—an important component of the cytoskeleton that creates the cell’s internal structural framework (see Figure 16–67).
Fibrous proteins are especially abundant outside the cell, where they are a main component of the gel-like extracellular matrix that helps to bind collections of cells together to form tissues. Cells secrete extracellular matrix proteins into their surroundings, where they often assemble into sheets or long fibrils. Collagen is the most abundant of these proteins in animal tissues. A collagen molecule consists of three long polypeptide chains, each containing the nonpolar amino acid glycene at every third position. This regular structure allows the chains to wind around one another to generate a long regular triple helix (Figure 3–23A). Many collagen molecules then bind to one another side-by-side and end-toend to create long overlapping arrays—thereby generating the extremely tough collagen fibrils that give connective tissues their tensile strength, as described in Chapter 19.
Proteins Contain a Surprisingly Large Amount of Intrinsically Disordered Polypeptide Chain
It has been well known for a long time that, in complete contrast to collagen, another abundant protein in the extracellular matrix, elastin, is formed as a highly disordered polypeptide. 