Because evolution has selected for protein function in living organisms, the amino acid sequence of most present-day proteins is such that a single conformation is stable. In addition, this conformation has its chemical properties finely tuned to enable the protein to perform a particular catalytic or structural function in the cell. Proteins are so precisely built that the change of even a few atoms in one amino acid can sometimes disrupt the structure of the whole molecule so severely that all function is lost. And, as discussed later in this chapter, when certain rare protein misfolding accidents occur, the results can be disastrous for the organisms that contain them.
Proteins Can Be Classified into Many Families
Once a protein had evolved that folded up into a stable conformation with useful properties, its structure could be modified during evolution to enable it to perform new functions. This process has been greatly accelerated by genetic mechanisms that occasionally duplicate genes, allowing one gene copy to evolve independently to perform a new function (discussed in Chapter 4). This type of event has occurred very often in the past; as a result, many present-day proteins can be grouped into protein families, each family member having an amino acid sequence and a three-dimensional conformation that resemble those of the other family members.
Consider, for example, the serine proteases, a large family of protein-cleaving (proteolytic) enzymes that includes the digestive enzymes chymotrypsin, trypsin, and elastase, and several proteases involved in blood clotting. When the protease portions of any two of these enzymes are compared, parts of their amino acid sequences are found to match. The similarity of their three-dimensional conformations is even more striking: most of the detailed twists and turns in their polypeptide chains, which are several hundred amino acids long, are virtually identical (Figure 3–12). The many different serine proteases nevertheless have distinct enzymatic activities, each cleaving different proteins or the peptide bonds between different types of amino acids. Each therefore performs a distinct function in an organism.
The story we have told for the serine proteases could be repeated for hundreds of other protein families. In general, the structure of the different members of a protein family has been more highly conserved than has the amino acid sequence. In many cases, the amino acid sequences have diverged so far that we cannot be certain of a family relationship between two proteins without determining their three-dimensional structures. The yeast α2 protein and the Drosophila engrailed protein, for example, are both gene regulatory proteins in the homeodomain family (discussed in Chapter 7). 