Eventually, any population of antibody molecules and ligands will reach a steady state, or equilibrium, in which the number of binding (association) events per second is precisely equal to the number of “unbinding” (dissociation) events (see Figure 2–30).
From the concentrations of the ligand, antibody, and antibody ligand complex at equilibrium, we can calculate a convenient measure of the strength of binding—the equilibrium constant (K)—(Figure 3–44A). This constant was described in detail in Chapter 2, where its connection to free energy differences was derived (see p. 62). The equilibrium constant for a reaction in which two molecules (A and B) bind to each other to form a complex (AB) has units of liters per mole, and half of the binding sites will be occupied by ligand when that ligand’s concentration (in moles per liter) reaches a value that is equal to 1 over K. This equilibrium constant is larger the greater the binding strength, and it is a direct measure of the free-energy difference between the bound and free states (Figure 3–44B). Even a change of a few noncovalent bonds can have a striking effect on a binding interaction, as shown by the example in Figure 3–45. (Note that the equilibrium constant, as defined here, is also known as the association or affinity constant, K a.)
We have used the case of an antibody binding to its ligand to illustrate the effect of binding strength on the equilibrium state, but the same principles apply to any molecule and its ligand. Many proteins are enzymes, which, as we now discuss, first bind to their ligands and then catalyze the breakage or formation of covalent bonds in these molecules.
Enzymes Are Powerful and Highly Specific Catalysts
Many proteins can perform their function simply by binding to another molecule. An actin molecule, for example, need only associate with other actin molecules to form a filament. There are other proteins, however, for which ligand binding is only a necessary first step in their function. This is the case for the large and very important class of proteins called enzymes. As described in Chapter 2, enzymes are remarkable molecules that cause the chemical transformations that make and break covalent bonds in cells. They bind to one or more ligands, called substrates, and convert them into one or more chemically modified products, doing this over and over again with amazing rapidity. Enzymes speed up reactions, often by a factor of a million or more, without themselves being changed—that is, they act as catalysts that permit cells to make or break covalent bonds in a controlled way. It is the catalysis of organized sets of chemical reactions by enzymes that creates and maintains the cell, making life possible.