The use of smaller subunits to build larger structures has several advantages:
1. A large structure built from one or a few repeating smaller subunits requires only a small amount of genetic information.
2. Both assembly and disassembly can be readily controlled reversible processes, because the subunits associate through multiple bonds of relatively low energy.
3. Errors in the synthesis of the structure can be more easily avoided, since correction mechanisms can operate during the course of assembly to exclude malformed subunits.
Some protein subunits assemble into flat sheets in which the subunits are arranged in hexagonal patterns. Specialized membrane proteins are sometimes arranged this way in lipid bilayers. With a slight change in the geometry of the individual subunits, a hexagonal sheet can be converted into a tube (Figure 3–26) or, with more changes, into a hollow sphere. Protein tubes and spheres that bind specific RNA and DNA molecules in their interior form the coats of viruses.
The formation of closed structures, such as rings, tubes, or spheres, provides additional stability because it increases the number of bonds between the protein subunits. Moreover, because such a structure is created by mutually dependent, cooperative interactions between subunits, a relatively small change that affects each subunit individually can cause the structure to assemble or disassemble. These principles are dramatically illustrated in the protein coat or capsid of many simple viruses, which takes the form of a hollow sphere based on an icosahedron (Figure 3–27). Capsids are often made of hundreds of identical protein subunits that enclose and protect the viral nucleic acid (Figure 3–28). The protein in such a capsid must have a particularly adaptable structure: not only must it make several different kinds of contacts to create the sphere, it must also change this arrangement to let the nucleic acid out to initiate viral replication once the virus has entered a cell.
Many Structures in Cells Are Capable of Self-Assembly
The information for forming many of the complex assemblies of macromolecules in cells must be contained in the subunits themselves, because purified subunits can spontaneously assemble into the final structure under the appropriate conditions. The first large macromolecular aggregate shown to be capable of self-assembly from its component parts was tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). This virus is a long rod in which a cylinder of protein is arranged around a helical RNA core (Figure 3–29). If the dissociated RNA and protein subunits are mixed together in solution, they recombine to form fully active viral particles. The assembly process is unexpectedly complex and includes the formation of double rings of protein, which serve as intermediates that add to the growing viral coat.