Studies of the conformation, function, and evolution of proteins have also revealed the central importance of a unit of organization distinct from these four. This is the protein domain, a substructure produced by any contiguous part of a polypeptide chain that can fold independently of the rest of the protein into a compact, stable structure. A domain usually contains between 40 and 350 amino acids, and it is the modular unit from which many larger proteins are constructed.
The different domains of a protein are often associated with different functions. Figure 3-10 shows an example—the Src protein kinase, which functions in signaling pathways inside vertebrate cells (Src is pronounced “sarc”). This protein is considered to have three domains: the SH2 and SH3 domains have regulatory roles, while the C-terminal domain is responsible for the kinase catalytic activity. Later in the chapter, we shall return to this protein, in order to explain how proteins can form molecular switches that transmit information throughout cells.
Figure 3-11 presents ribbon models of three differently organized protein domains. As these examples illustrate, the central core of a domain can be constructed from α helices, from β sheets, or from various combinations of these two fundamental folding elements.
The smallest protein molecules contain only a single domain, whereas larger proteins can contain several dozen domains, often connected to each other by short, relatively unstructured lengths of polypeptide chain that can act as flexible hinges between domains.
Few of the Many Possible Polypeptide Chains Will Be Useful to Cells
Since each of the 20 amino acids is chemically distinct and each can, in principle, occur at any position in a protein chain, there are 20 × 20 × 20 × 20 = 160,000 different possible polypeptide chains four amino acids long, or 20 to the n different possible polypeptide chains n amino acids long. For a typical protein length of about 300 amino acids, a cell could theoretically make more than 10 to the 390 (20 to the 300) different polypeptide chains. This is such an enormous number that to produce just one molecule of each kind would require many more atoms than exist in the universe.
Only a very small fraction of this vast set of conceivable polypeptide chains would adopt a stable three-dimensional conformation—by some estimates, less than one in a billion. And yet the majority of proteins present in cells do adopt unique and stable conformations. How is this possible? The answer lies in natural selection. A protein with an unpredictably variable structure and biochemical activity is unlikely to help the survival of a cell that contains it. Such proteins would therefore have been eliminated by natural selection through the enormously long trial-and-error process that underlies biological evolution.