Antibodies, or immunoglobulins, are proteins produced by the immune system in response to foreign molecules, such as those on the surface of an invading microorganism. Each antibody binds tightly to a particular target molecule, thereby either inactivating the target molecule directly or marking it for destruction. An antibody recognizes its target (called an antigen) with remarkable specificity. Because there are potentially billions of different antigens that humans might encounter, we have to be able to produce billions of different antibodies.
Antibodies are Y-shaped molecules with two identical binding sites that are complementary to a small portion of the surface of the antigen molecule. A detailed examination of the antigen-binding sites of antibodies reveals that they are formed from several loops of polypeptide chain that protrude from the ends of a pair of closely juxtaposed protein domains (Figure 3–42). Different antibodies generate an enormous diversity of antigen-binding sites by changing only the length and amino acid sequence of these loops, without altering the basic protein structure.
Loops of this kind are ideal for grasping other molecules. They allow a large number of chemical groups to surround a ligand so that the protein can link to it with many weak bonds. For this reason, loops often form the ligand-binding sites in proteins.
The Equilibrium Constant Measures Binding Strength
Molecules in the cell encounter each other very frequently because of their continual random thermal movements. Colliding molecules with poorly matching surfaces form few noncovalent bonds with one another, and the two molecules dissociate as rapidly as they come together. At the other extreme, when many noncovalent bonds form between two colliding molecules, the association can persist for a very long time (Figure 3–43). Strong interactions occur in cells whenever a biological function requires that molecules remain associated for a long time—for example, when a group of RNA and protein molecules come together to make a subcellular structure such as a ribosome.
We can measure the strength with which any two molecules bind to each other. As an example, consider a population of identical antibody molecules that suddenly encounters a population of ligands diffusing in the fluid surrounding them. At frequent intervals, one of the ligand molecules will bump into the binding site of an antibody and form an antibody–ligand complex. The population of antibody–ligand complexes will therefore increase, but not without limit: over time, a second process, in which individual complexes break apart because of thermally induced motion, will become increasingly important. 