The answer lies in the spatial organization of cell components. The cell can increase reaction rates without raising substrate concentrations by bringing the various enzymes involved in a reaction sequence together to form a large protein assembly known as a multienzyme complex (Figure 3–54). Because this assembly is organized in a way that allows the product of enzyme A to be passed directly to enzyme B, and so on, diffusion rates need not be limiting, even when the concentrations of the substrates in the cell as a whole are very low. It is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that such enzyme complexes are very common, and they are involved in nearly all aspects of metabolism—including the central genetic processes of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis. In fact, few enzymes in eukaryotic cells diffuse freely in solution; instead, most seem to have evolved binding sites that concentrate them with other proteins of related function in particular regions of the cell, thereby increasing the rate and efficiency of the reactions that they catalyze (see p. 331).
Eukaryotic cells have yet another way of increasing the rate of metabolic reactions: using their intracellular membrane systems. These membranes can segregate particular substrates and the enzymes that act on them into the same membrane-enclosed compartment, such as the endoplasmic reticulum or the cell nucleus. If, for example, a compartment occupies a total of 10% of the volume of the cell, the concentration of reactants in that compartment may be increased by 10 times compared with a cell with the same number of enzyme and substrate molecules, but no compartmentalization. Reactions limited by the speed of diffusion can thereby be speeded up by a factor of 10.
The Cell Regulates the Catalytic Activities of Its Enzymes
A living cell contains thousands of enzymes, many of which operate at the same time and in the same small volume of the cytosol. By their catalytic action, these enzymes generate a complex web of metabolic pathways, each composed of chains of chemical reactions in which the product of one enzyme becomes the substrate of the next. In this maze of pathways, there are many branch points (nodes) where different enzymes compete for the same substrate. The system is complex (see Figure 2–63), and elaborate controls are required to regulate when and how rapidly each reaction occurs.
Regulation occurs at many levels. At one level, the cell controls how many molecules of each enzyme it makes by regulating the expression of the gene that encodes that enzyme (discussed in Chapter 7). The cell also controls enzymatic activities by confining sets of enzymes to particular subcellular compartments, whether by enclosing them in a distinct membrane-bounded compartment (discussed in Chapters 12 and 14) or by concentrating them on a protein scaffold (see Figure 3–77). 