By comparing the number of amino acid sequence differences between the various members of a protein family, we can construct an “evolutionary tree” that is thought to reflect the pattern of gene duplication and divergence that gave rise to the family. Figure 3–62 shows an evolutionary tree of protein kinases. Kinases with related functions are often located on nearby branches of the tree: the protein kinases involved in cell signaling that phosphorylate tyrosine side chains, for example, are all clustered in the top left corner of the tree. The other kinases shown phosphorylate either a serine or a threonine side chain, and many are organized into clusters that seem to reflect their function—in transmembrane signal transduction, intracellular signal amplification, cell-cycle control, and so on.
As a result of the combined activities of protein kinases and protein phosphatases, the phosphate groups on proteins are continually turning over—being added and then rapidly removed. Such phosphorylation cycles may seem wasteful, but they are important in allowing the phosphorylated proteins to switch rapidly from one state to another: the more rapid the cycle, the faster a population of protein molecules can change its state of phosphorylation in response to a sudden change in its phosphorylation rate (see Figure 15–14). The energy required to drive this phosphorylation cycle is derived from the free energy of ATP hydrolysis, one molecule of which is consumed for each phosphorylation event.
The Regulation of the Sarc Protein Kinase Reveals How a Protein Can Function as a Microprocessor
The hundreds of different protein kinases in a eukaryotic cell are organized into complex networks of signaling pathways that help to coordinate the cell’s activities, drive the cell cycle, and relay signals into the cell from the cell’s environment. Many of the extracellular signals involved need to be both integrated and amplified by the cell. Individual protein kinases (and other signaling proteins) serve as input–output devices, or “microprocessors,” in the integration process. An important part of the input to these signal-processing proteins comes from the control that is exerted by phosphates added and removed from them by protein kinases and protein phosphatases, respectively.
The Sarc family of protein kinases (see Figure 3–10) exhibits such behavior. The Sarc protein (pronounced “sarc” and named for the type of tumor, a sarcoma, that its deregulation can cause) was the first tyrosine kinase to be discovered. It is now known to be part of a subfamily of nine very similar protein kinases, which are found only in multicellular animals. 