As indicated by the evolutionary tree in Figure 3–62, sequence comparisons suggest that tyrosine kinases as a group were a relatively late innovation that branched off from the serine/threonine kinases, with the Src subfamily being only one subgroup of the tyrosine kinases created in this way.
The Src protein and its relatives contain a short N-terminal region that becomes covalently linked to a strongly hydrophobic fatty acid, which anchors the kinase at the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. Next along the linear sequence of amino acids come two peptide-binding domains, a Src homology 3 (SH3) domain and an SH2 domain, followed by the kinase catalytic domain (Figure 3–63). These kinases normally exist in an inactive conformation, in which a phosphorylated tyrosine near the C-terminus is bound to the SH2 domain, and the SH3 domain is bound to an internal peptide in a way that distorts the active site of the enzyme and helps to render it inactive.
As shown in Figure 3–64, turning the kinase on involves at least two specific inputs: removal of the C-terminal phosphate and the binding of the SH3 domain by a specific activating protein. In this way, the activation of the Src kinase signals the completion of a particular set of separate upstream events (Figure 3–65). Thus, the Src family of protein kinases serves as specific signal integrators, contributing to the web of information-processing events that enable the cell to compute useful responses to a complex set of different conditions.
Proteins That Bind and Hydrolyze GTP Are Ubiquitous Cell Regulators
We have described how the addition or removal of phosphate groups on a protein can be used by a cell to control the protein’s activity. In the example just discussed, a kinase transfers a phosphate from an ATP molecule to an amino acid side chain of a target protein. Eukaryotic cells also have another way to control protein activity by phosphate addition and removal. In this case, the phosphate is not attached directly to the protein; instead, it is a part of the guanine nucleotide GTP, which binds very tightly to a class of proteins known as GTP-binding proteins. In general, proteins regulated in this way are in their active conformations with GTP bound. The loss of a phosphate group occurs when the bound GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP in a reaction catalyzed by the protein itself, and in its GDP-bound state the protein is inactive. In this way, GTP-binding proteins act as on off switches whose activity is determined by the presence or absence of an additional phosphate on a bound GDP molecule (Figure 3–66).