This property creates a positive feedback loop that propagates the abnormal form of PrP, called PrP star, and allows the pathological conformation to spread rapidly from cell to cell in the brain, eventually causing death. It can be dangerous to eat the tissues of animals that contain PrP star, as witnessed by the spread of BSE (commonly referred to as “mad cow disease”) from cattle to humans. Fortunately, in the absence of PrP star, PrP is extraordinarily difficult to convert to its abnormal form.
A closely related “protein-only inheritance” has been observed in yeast cells. The ability to study infectious proteins in yeast has clarified another remarkable feature of prions. These protein molecules can form several distinctively different types of amyloid fibrils from the same polypeptide chain. Moreover, each type of aggregate can be infectious, forcing normal protein molecules to adopt the same type of abnormal structure. Thus, several different “strains” of infectious particles can arise from the same polypeptide chain. 
Amyloid Structures Can Perform Useful Functions in Cells
Amyloid fibrils were initially studied because they cause disease. But the same type of structure is now known to be exploited by cells for useful purposes. Eukaryotic cells, for example, store many different peptide and protein hormones that they will secrete in specialized “secretory granules,” which package a high concentration of their cargo in dense cores with a regular structure (see Figure 13–65). We now know that these structured cores consist of amyloid fibrils, which in this case have a structure that causes them to dissolve to release soluble cargo after being secreted by exocytosis to the cell exterior (Figure 3–34A). Many bacteria use the amyloid structure in a very different way, secreting proteins that form long amyloid fibrils projecting from the cell exterior that help to bind bacterial neighbors into biofilms (Figure 3–34B). Because these biofilms help bacteria to survive in adverse environments (including in humans treated with antibiotics), new drugs that specifically disrupt the fibrous networks formed by bacterial amyloids have promise for treating human infections.
Many Proteins Contain Low-complexity Domains that Can Form “Reversible Amyloids”
Until recently, those amyloids with useful functions were thought to be either confined to the interior of specialized vesicles or expressed on the exterior of cells, as in Figure 3–34. However, new experiments reveal that a large set of low complexity domains can form amyloid fibers that have functional roles in both the cell nucleus and the cell cytoplasm. 