A large number of proteins are now known to be modified on more than one amino acid side chain, with different regulatory events producing a different pattern of such modifications. A striking example is the protein p53, which plays a central part in controlling a cell’s response to adverse circumstances (see Figure 17–62). Through one of four different types of molecular additions, this protein can be modified at 20 different sites. Because an enormous number of different combinations of these 20 modifications are possible, the protein’s behavior can in principle be altered in a huge number of ways. Such modifications will often create a site on the modified protein that binds it to a scaffold protein in a specific region of the cell, thereby connecting it—via the scaffold—to the other proteins required for a reaction at that site.
One can view each protein’s set of covalent modifications as a combinatorial regulatory code. Specific modifying groups are added to or removed from a protein in response to signals, and the code then alters protein behavior—changing the activity or stability of the protein, its binding partners, and/or its specific location within the cell (Figure 3–79). As a result, the cell is able to respond rapidly and with great versatility to changes in its condition or environment.
A Complex Network of Protein Interactions Underlies Cell Function
There are many challenges facing cell biologists in this information-rich era when a large number of complete genome sequences are known. One is the need to dissect and reconstruct each one of the thousands of protein machines that exist in an organism such as ourselves. To understand these remarkable protein complexes, each will need to be reconstituted from its purified protein parts, so that we can study its detailed mode of operation under controlled conditions in a test tube, free from all other cell components. This alone is a massive task. But we now know that each of these subcomponents of a cell also interacts with other sets of macromolecules, creating a large network of protein–protein and protein–nucleic acid interactions throughout the cell. To understand the cell, therefore, we will need to analyze most of these other interactions as well.
We can gain some idea of the complexity of intracellular protein networks from a particularly well-studied example described in Chapter 16: the many dozens of proteins that interact with the actin cytoskeleton to control actin filament behavior (see Panel 16–3, p. 905).
The extent of such protein–protein interactions can also be estimated more generally. An enormous amount of valuable information is now freely available in protein databases on the Internet: tens of thousands of three-dimensional protein structures plus tens of millions of protein sequences derived from the nucleotide sequences of genes. 