More importantly, however, some of the binding energy contributes directly to the catalysis. Substrate molecules must pass through a series of intermediate states of altered geometry and electron distribution before they form the ultimate products of the reaction. The free energy required to attain the most unstable intermediate state, called the transition state, is known as the activation energy for the reaction, and it is the major determinant of the reaction rate. Enzymes have a much higher affinity for the transition state of the substrate than they have for the stable form.
Because this tight binding greatly lowers the energy of the transition state, the enzyme greatly accelerates a particular reaction by lowering the activation energy that is required (Figure 3–47).
Enzymes Can Use Simultaneous Acid and Base Catalysis
Figure 3–48 compares the spontaneous reaction rates and the corresponding enzyme-catalyzed rates for five enzymes. Rate accelerations range from 109 to 1023. Enzymes not only bind tightly to a transition state, they also contain precisely positioned atoms that alter the electron distributions in the atoms that participate directly in the making and breaking of covalent bonds. Peptide bonds, for example, can be hydrolyzed in the absence of an enzyme by exposing a polypeptide to either a strong acid or a strong base. Enzymes are unique, however, in being able to use acid and base catalysis simultaneously, because the rigid framework of the protein constrains the acidic and basic residues and prevents them from combining with each other, as they would do in solution (Figure 3–49).
The fit between an enzyme and its substrate needs to be precise. A small change introduced by genetic engineering in the active site of an enzyme can therefore have a profound effect. Replacing a glutamic acid with an aspartic acid in one enzyme, for example, shifts the position of the catalytic carboxylate ion by only 1 angstrom (about the radius of a hydrogen atom); yet this is enough to decrease the activity of the enzyme a thousandfold.
Lysozyme Illustrates How an Enzyme Works
To demonstrate how enzymes catalyze chemical reactions, we examine an enzyme that acts as a natural antibiotic in egg white, saliva, tears, and other secretions. Lysozyme catalyzes the cutting of polysaccharide chains in the cell walls of bacteria. The bacterial cell is under pressure from osmotic forces, and cutting even a small number of these chains causes the cell wall to rupture and the cell to burst. A relatively small and stable protein that can be easily isolated in large quantities, lysozyme was the first enzyme to have its structure worked out in atomic detail by x-ray crystallography (in the mid-1960s).