We have seen that conformational changes in proteins have a central role in enzyme regulation and cell signaling. We now discuss proteins whose major function is to move other molecules. These motor proteins generate the forces responsible for muscle contraction and the crawling and swimming of cells. Motor proteins also power smaller-scale intracellular movements: they help to move chromosomes to opposite ends of the cell during mitosis (discussed in Chapter 17), to move organelles along molecular tracks within the cell (discussed in Chapter 16), and to move enzymes along a DNA strand during the synthesis of a new DNA molecule (discussed in Chapter 5). All these fundamental processes depend on proteins with moving parts that operate as force-generating machines.
How do these machines work? In other words, how do cells use shape changes in proteins to generate directed movements? If, for example, a protein is required to walk along a narrow thread such as a DNA molecule, it can do this by undergoing a series of conformational changes, such as those shown in Figure 3–74. But with nothing to drive these changes in an orderly sequence, they are perfectly reversible, and the protein can only wander randomly back and forth along the thread. We can look at this situation in another way. Since the directional movement of a protein does work, the laws of thermodynamics (discussed in Chapter 2) demand that such movement use free energy from some other source (otherwise the protein could be used to make a perpetual motion machine). Therefore, without an input of energy, the protein molecule can only wander aimlessly.
How can the cell make such a series of conformational changes unidirectional? To force the entire cycle to proceed in one direction, it is enough to make any one of the changes in shape irreversible. Most proteins that are able to walk in one direction for long distances achieve this motion by coupling one of the conformational changes to the hydrolysis of an ATP molecule that is tightly bound to the protein. The mechanism is similar to the one just discussed that drives allosteric protein shape changes by GTP hydrolysis. Because ATP (or GTP) hydrolysis releases a great deal of free energy, it is very unlikely that the nucleotide-binding protein will undergo the reverse shape change needed for moving backward—since this would require that it also reverse the ATP hydrolysis by adding a phosphate molecule to ADP to form ATP.