As will be explained later in this chapter, enzymes are also covalently modified to control their activity. The rate of protein destruction by targeted proteolysis represents yet another important regulatory mechanism (see Figure 6–86). But the most general process that adjusts reaction rates operates through a direct, reversible change in the activity of an enzyme in response to the specific small molecules that it binds.
The most common type of control occurs when an enzyme binds a molecule that is not a substrate to a special regulatory site outside the active site, thereby altering the rate at which the enzyme converts its substrates to products. For example, in feedback inhibition, a product produced late in a reaction pathway inhibits an enzyme that acts earlier in the pathway. Thus, whenever large quantities of the final product begin to accumulate, this product binds to the enzyme and slows down its catalytic action, thereby limiting the further entry of substrates into that reaction pathway (Figure 3–55). Where pathways branch or intersect, there are usually multiple points of control by different final products, each of which works to regulate its own synthesis (Figure 3–56). Feedback inhibition can work almost instantaneously, and it is rapidly reversed when the level of the product falls.
Feedback inhibition is negative regulation: it prevents an enzyme from acting. Enzymes can also be subject to positive regulation, in which a regulatory molecule stimulates the enzyme’s activity rather than shutting the enzyme down. Positive regulation occurs when a product in one branch of the metabolic network stimulates the activity of an enzyme in another pathway. As one example, the accumulation of ADP activates several enzymes involved in the oxidation of sugar molecules, thereby stimulating the cell to convert more ADP to ATP.
Allosteric Enzymes Have Two or More Binding Sites That Interact
A striking feature of both positive and negative feedback regulation is that the regulatory molecule often has a shape totally different from the shape of the substrate of the enzyme. This is why the effect on a protein is termed allostery (from the Greek words allos, meaning “other,” and stereos, meaning “solid” or “three-dimensional”). As biologists learned more about feedback regulation, they recognized that the enzymes involved must have at least two different binding sites on their surface—an active site that recognizes the substrates, and a regulatory site that recognizes a regulatory molecule. These two sites must somehow communicate so that the catalytic events at the active site can be influenced by the binding of the regulatory molecule at its separate site on the protein’s surface.