The reaction that lysozyme catalyzes is a hydrolysis: it adds a molecule of water to a single bond between two adjacent sugar groups in the polysaccharide chain, thereby causing the bond to break (see Figure 2–9). The reaction is energetically favorable because the free energy of the severed polysaccharide chain is lower than the free energy of the intact chain. However, there is an energy barrier to the reaction, and a colliding water molecule can break a bond linking two sugars only if the polysaccharide molecule is distorted into a particular shape—the transition state—in which the atoms around the bond have an altered geometry and electron distribution. Because of this requirement, random collisions must supply a very large activation energy for the reaction to take place. In an aqueous solution at room temperature, the energy of collisions almost never exceeds the activation energy. The pure polysaccharide can therefore remain for years in water without being hydrolyzed to any detectable degree.
This situation changes drastically when the polysaccharide binds to lysozyme. The active site of lysozyme, because its substrate is a polymer, is a long groove that holds six linked sugars at the same time. As soon as the polysaccharide binds to form an enzyme substrate complex, the enzyme cuts the polysaccharide by adding a water molecule across one of its sugar–sugar bonds. The product chains are then quickly released, freeing the enzyme for further cycles of reaction (Figure 3–50).
An impressive increase in hydrolysis rate is possible because conditions are created in the microenvironment of the lysozyme active site that greatly reduce the activation energy necessary for the hydrolysis to take place. In particular, lysozyme distorts one of the two sugars connected by the bond to be broken from its normal, most stable conformation. The bond to be broken is also held close to two amino acids with acidic side chains (a glutamic acid and an aspartic acid) that participate directly in the reaction. Figure 3–51 shows the three central steps in this enzymatically catalyzed reaction, which occurs millions of times faster than uncatalyzed hydrolysis.
Other enzymes use similar mechanisms to lower activation energies and speed up the reactions they catalyze. In reactions involving two or more reactants, the active site also acts like a template, or mold, that brings the substrates together in the proper orientation for a reaction to occur between them (Figure 3–52A). As we saw for lysozyme, the active site of an enzyme contains precisely positioned atoms that speed up a reaction by using charged groups to alter the distribution of electrons in the substrates (Figure 3–52B).