The Human Genome Encodes a Complex Set of Proteins, Revealing That Much Remains Unknown
The result of sequencing the human genome has been surprising, because it reveals that our chromosomes contain only about 21,000 protein-coding genes. Based on this number alone, we would appear to be no more complex than the tiny mustard weed, Arabidopsis, and only about 1.3-fold more complex than a nematode worm. The genome sequences also reveal that vertebrates have inherited nearly all of their protein domains from invertebrates—with only 7% of identified human domains being vertebrate-specific.
Each of our proteins is on average more complicated, however (Figure 3–17). Domain shuffling during vertebrate evolution has given rise to many novel combinations of protein domains, with the result that there are nearly twice as many combinations of domains found in human proteins as in a worm or a fly. Thus, for example, the trypsinlike serine protease domain is linked to at least 18 other types of protein domains in human proteins, whereas it is found covalently joined to only 5 different domains in the worm. This extra variety in our proteins greatly increases the range of protein–protein interactions possible (see Figure 3–79), but how it contributes to making us human is not known.
The complexity of living organisms is staggering, and it is quite sobering to note that we currently lack even the tiniest hint of what the function might be for more than 10,000 of the proteins that have thus far been identified through examining the human genome. There are certainly enormous challenges ahead for the next generation of cell biologists, with no shortage of fascinating mysteries to solve.
Larger Protein Molecules Often Contain More Than One Polypeptide Chain
The same weak noncovalent bonds that enable a protein chain to fold into a specific conformation also allow proteins to bind to each other to produce larger structures in the cell. Any region of a protein’s surface that can interact with another molecule through sets of noncovalent bonds is called a binding site. A protein can contain binding sites for various large and small molecules. If a binding site recognizes the surface of a second protein, the tight binding of two folded polypeptide chains at this site creates a larger protein molecule with a precisely defined geometry. Each polypeptide chain in such a protein is called a protein subunit.
In the simplest case, two identical folded polypeptide chains bind to each other in a “head-to-head” arrangement, forming a symmetric complex of two protein subunits (a dimer) held together by interactions between two identical binding sites. The Cro repressor protein—a viral gene regulatory protein that binds to DNA to turn specific viral genes off in an infected bacterial cell—provides an example (Figure 3–18). 