The repeating sequence of atoms along the core of the polypeptide chain is referred to as the polypeptide backbone. Attached to this repetitive chain are those portions of the amino acids that are not involved in making a peptide bond and that give each amino acid its unique properties: the 20 different amino acid side chains (Figure 3–1). Some of these side chains are nonpolar and hydrophobic (“water-fearing”), others are negatively or positively charged, some readily form covalent bonds, and so on. Panel 3 1 (pp. 112–113) shows their atomic structures and Figure 3–2 lists their abbreviations.
As discussed in Chapter 2, atoms behave almost as if they were hard spheres with a definite radius (their van der Waals radius). The requirement that no two atoms overlap plus other constraints limit the possible bond angles in a polypeptide chain (Figure 3–3), severely restricting the possible three-dimensional arrangements (or conformations) of atoms. Nevertheless, a long flexible chain such as a protein can still fold in an enormous number of ways.
The folding of a protein chain is also determined by many different sets of weak noncovalent bonds that form between one part of the chain and another. These involve atoms in the polypeptide backbone, as well as atoms in the amino acid side chains. There are three types of these weak bonds: hydrogen bonds, electrostatic attractions, and van der Waals attractions, as explained in Chapter 2 (see p. 44). Individual noncovalent bonds are 30–300 times weaker than the typical covalent bonds that create biological molecules. But many weak bonds acting in parallel can hold two regions of a polypeptide chain tightly together. In this way, the combined strength of large numbers of such noncovalent bonds determines the stability of each folded shape (Figure 3–4).
A fourth weak force—a hydrophobic clustering force—also has a central role in determining the shape of a protein. As described in Chapter 2, hydrophobic molecules, including the nonpolar side chains of particular amino acids, tend to be forced together in an aqueous environment in order to minimize their disruptive effect on the hydrogen-bonded network of water molecules (see Panel 2 2, pp. 92–93). Therefore, an important factor governing the folding of any protein is the distribution of its polar and nonpolar amino acids. The nonpolar (hydrophobic) side-chains in a protein—belonging to such amino acids as phenylalanine, leucine, valine, and tryptophan—tend to cluster in the interior of the molecule (just as hydrophobic oil droplets coalesce in water to form one large droplet). 