Because they are identical in only 17 of their 60 amino acid residues, their relationship became certain only by comparing their three-dimensional structures (Figure 3–13). Many similar examples show that two proteins with more than 25% identity in their amino acid sequences usually share the same overall structure.
The various members of a large protein family often have distinct functions. Some of the amino acid changes that make family members different were no doubt selected in the course of evolution because they resulted in useful changes in biological activity, giving the individual family members the different functional properties they have today. But many other amino acid changes are effectively “neutral,” having neither a beneficial nor a damaging effect on the basic structure and function of the protein. In addition, since mutation is a random process, there must also have been many deleterious changes that altered the three-dimensional structure of these proteins sufficiently to harm them. Such faulty proteins would have been lost whenever the individual organisms making them were at enough of a disadvantage to be eliminated by natural selection.
Protein families are readily recognized when the genome of any organism is sequenced; for example, the determination of the DNA sequence for the entire human genome has revealed that we contain about 21,000 protein-coding genes. (Note, however, that as a result of alternative RNA splicing, human cells can produce much more than 21,000 different proteins, as will be explained in Chapter 6.) Through sequence comparisons, we can assign the products of at least 40% of our protein-coding genes to known protein structures, belonging to more than 500 different protein families. Most of the proteins in each family have evolved to perform somewhat different functions, as for the enzymes elastase and chymotrypsin illustrated previously in Figure 3–12. As explained in Chapter 1 (see Figure 1–21), these are sometimes called paralogs to distinguish them from the many corresponding proteins in different organisms (orthologs, such as mouse and human elastase).
As described in Chapter 8, because of the powerful techniques of x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), we now know the three-dimensional shapes, or conformations, of more than 100,000 proteins. By carefully comparing the conformations of these proteins, structural biologists (that is, experts on the structure of biological molecules) have concluded that there are a limited number of ways in which protein domains fold up in nature—maybe as few as 2000, if we consider all organisms. For most of these so-called protein folds, representative structures have been determined.