The major form of ubiquitin addition produces polyubiquitin chains in which—once the first ubiquitin molecule is attached to the target—each subsequent ubiquitin molecule links to Lys48 of the previous ubiquitin, creating a chain of Lys48-linked ubiquitins that are attached to a single lysine side chain of the target protein. This form of polyubiquitin directs the target protein to the interior of a proteasome, where it is digested to small peptides (see Figure 6–84). In other circumstances, only single molecules of ubiquitin are added to proteins. In addition, some target proteins are modified with a different type of polyubiquitin chain. These modifications have different functional consequences for the protein that is targeted (Figure 3–69B).
Related structures are created when a different member of the ubiquitin family, such as SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier), is covalently attached to a lysine side chain of target proteins. Not surprisingly, all such modifications are reversible. Cells contain sets of ubiquitylating and deubiquitylating (and sumoylating and desumoylating) enzymes that manipulate these covalent adducts, thereby playing roles analogous to the protein kinases and phosphatases that add and remove phosphates from protein side chains.
An Elaborate Ubiquitin-Conjugating System Is Used to Mark Proteins
How do cells select target proteins for ubiquitin addition? As an initial step, the carboxyl end of ubiquitin needs to be activated. This activation is accomplished when a protein called a ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) uses ATP hydrolysis energy to attach ubiquitin to itself through a high-energy covalent bond (a thioester). E1 then passes this activated ubiquitin to one of a set of ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes, each of which acts in conjunction with a set of accessory (E3) proteins called ubiquitin ligases. There are roughly 30 structurally similar but distinct E2 enzymes in mammals, and hundreds of different E3 proteins that form complexes with specific E2 enzymes.
Figure 3–70 illustrates the process used to mark proteins for proteasomal degradation. [Similar mechanisms are used to attach ubiquitin (and SUMO) to other types of target proteins.] Here, the ubiquitin ligase binds to specific degradation signals, called degrons, in protein substrates, thereby helping E2 to form a polyubiquitin chain linked to a lysine of the substrate protein. This polyubiquitin chain on a target protein will then be recognized by a specific receptor in the proteasome, causing the target protein to be destroyed. Distinct ubiquitin ligases recognize different degradation signals, thereby targeting distinct subsets of intracellular proteins for destruction, often in response to specific signals (see Figure 6–86).