In the model shown in Figure 3–75A, ATP binding shifts a motor protein from conformation 1 to conformation 2. The bound ATP is then hydrolyzed to produce ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi), causing a change from conformation 2 to conformation 3. Finally, the release of the bound ADP and Pi drives the protein back to conformation 1. Because the energy provided by ATP hydrolysis drives the transition 2 → 3, this series of conformational changes is effectively irreversible. Thus, the entire cycle goes in only one direction, causing the protein molecule to walk continuously to the right in this example.
Many motor proteins generate directional movement through the use of a similar unidirectional ratchet, including the muscle motor protein myosin which walks along actin filaments (Figure 3–75B), and the kinesin proteins that walk along microtubules (both discussed in Chapter 16). These movements can be rapid: some of the motor proteins involved in DNA replication (the DNA helicases) propel themselves along a DNA strand at rates as high as 1000 nucleotides per second.
Membrane-Bound Transporters Harness Energy to Pump Molecules Through Membranes
We have thus far seen how proteins that undergo allosteric shape changes can act as microprocessors (Src family kinases), as assembly factors (EF-Tu), and as generators of mechanical force and motion (motor proteins). Allosteric proteins can also harness energy derived from ATP hydrolysis, ion gradients, or electron-transport processes to pump specific ions or small molecules across a membrane. We consider one example here that will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 11.
The ABC transporters (ATP-binding cassette transporters) constitute an important class of membrane-bound pump proteins. In humans, at least 48 different genes encode them. These transporters mostly function to export hydrophobic molecules from the cytoplasm, serving to remove toxic molecules at the mucosal surface of the intestinal tract, for example, or at the blood–brain barrier. The study of ABC transporters is of intense interest in clinical medicine, because the overproduction of proteins in this class contributes to the resistance of tumor cells to chemotherapeutic drugs. In bacteria, the same types of proteins primarily function to import essential nutrients into the cell.
A typical ABC transporter contains a pair of membrane-spanning subunits linked to a pair of ATP-binding subunits located just below the plasma membrane. As in other examples we have discussed, the hydrolysis of the bound ATP molecules drives conformational changes in the protein, transmitting forces that cause the membrane-spanning subunits to move their bound molecules across the lipid bilayer (Figure 3–76).