These domains are normally unstructured and consist of stretches of amino acid sequence that can span hundreds of amino acids, while containing only a small subset of the 20 different amino acids. In contrast to the disease-associated amyloid in Figure 3–33, these newly discovered structures are held together by weaker noncovalent bonds and readily dissociate in response to signals—hence their name reversible amyloids.
Many proteins with such domains also contain a different set of domains that bind to specific other protein or RNA molecules. Thus, their controlled aggregation in the cell can form a hydrogel that pulls these and other molecules into punctate structures called intracellular bodies, or granules. Specific mRNAs can be sequestered in such granules, where they are stored until made available by a controlled disassembly of the core amyloid structure that holds them together.
Consider the FUS protein, an essential nuclear protein with roles in the transcription, processing, and transport of specific mRNA molecules. Over 80 percent of its C-terminal domain of two hundred amino acids is composed of only four amino acids: glycine, serine, glutamine, and tyrosine. This low complexity domain is attached to several other domains that bind to RNA molecules. At high enough concentrations in a test tube, it forms a hydrogel that will associate with either itself or with the low complexity domains from other proteins. As illustrated by the experiment in Figure 3–35, although different low complexity domains bind to each other, homotypic interactions appear to be of greatest affinity (thus, the FUS low complexity domain binds most tightly to itself). Further experiments reveal that that both the homotypic and the heterotypic bindings are mediated through a β-sheet core structure forming amyloid fibrils, and that these structures bind to other types of repeat sequences in the manner indicated in Figure 3–36.
Many of these interactions appear to be controlled by the phosphorylation of serine side chains in the one or both of the interacting partners. However, a great deal remains to be learned concerning these newly discovered structures and the varied roles that they play in the cell biology of eukaryotic cells.
Summary
A protein molecule’s amino acid sequence determines its three-dimensional conformation. Noncovalent interactions between different parts of the polypeptide chain stabilize its folded structure. The amino acids with hydrophobic side chains tend to cluster in the interior of the molecule, and local hydrogen-bond interactions between neighboring peptide bonds give rise to α helices and β sheets.