This disorder is essential for elastin’s function. Its relatively loose and unstructured polypeptide chains are covalently cross-linked to produce a rubberlike, elastic meshwork that can be reversibly pulled from one conformation to another, as illustrated in Figure 3–23B. The elastic fibers that result enable skin and other tissues, such as arteries and lungs, to stretch and recoil without tearing.
Intrinsically disordered regions of proteins are frequent in nature, and they have important functions in the interior of cells. As we have already seen, proteins often have loops of polypeptide chain that protrude from the core region of a protein domain to bind other molecules. Some of these loops remain largely unstructured until they bind to a target molecule, adopting a specific folded conformation only when this other molecule is bound. Many proteins were also known to have intrinsically disordered tails at one or the other end of a structured domain (see, for example, the histones in Figure 4–24). But the extent of such disordered structure only became clear when genomes were sequenced. This allowed bioinformatic methods to be used to analyze the amino acid sequences that genes encode, searching for disordered regions based on their unusually low hydrophobicity and relatively high net charge. Combining these results with other data, it is now thought that perhaps a quarter of all eukaryotic proteins can adopt structures that are mostly disordered, fluctuating rapidly between many different conformations. Many such intrinsically disordered regions contain repeated sequences of amino acids. What do these disordered regions do?
Some known functions are illustrated in Figure 3–24. One predominant function is to form specific binding sites for other protein molecules that are of high specificity, but readily altered by protein phosphorylation, protein dephosphorylation, or any of the other covalent modifications that are triggered by cell signaling events (Figure 3–24A and B). We shall see, for example, that the eukaryotic RNA polymerase enzyme that produces mRNAs contains a long, unstructured C-terminal tail that is covalently modified as its RNA synthesis proceeds, thereby attracting specific other proteins to the transcription complex at different times (see Figure 6–22). And this unstructured tail interacts with a different type of low complexity domain when the RNA polymerase is recruited to the specific sites on the DNA where it begins synthesis.
As illustrated in Figure 3–24C, an unstructured region can also serve as a “tether” to hold two protein domains in close proximity to facilitate their interaction. For example, it is this tethering function that allows substrates to move between active sites in large multienzyme complexes (see Figure 3–54). 