The SH2 domain functions to link two proteins together. It binds the protein containing it to a second protein that contains a phosphorylated tyrosine side chain in a specific amino acid sequence context, as shown in Figure 3–40B. The amino acids located at the binding site for the phosphorylated polypeptide have been the slowest to change during the long evolutionary process that produced the large SH2 family of peptide recognition domains. Mutation is a random process; survival is not. Thus, natural selection (random mutation followed by nonrandom survival) produces the sequence conservation by preferentially eliminating organisms whose SH2 domains become altered in a way that inactivates the SH2 binding site, destroying SH2 function.
Genome sequencing has revealed huge numbers of proteins whose functions are unknown. Once a three-dimensional structure has been determined for one member of a protein family, evolutionary tracing allows biologists to determine binding sites for the members of that family, providing a useful start in deciphering protein function.
Proteins Bind to Other Proteins Through Several Types of Interfaces
Proteins can bind to other proteins in multiple ways. In many cases, a portion of the surface of one protein contacts an extended loop of polypeptide chain (a “string”) on a second protein (Figure 3–41A). Such a surface string interaction, for example, allows the SH2 domain to recognize a phosphorylated polypeptide loop on a second protein, as just described, and it also enables a protein kinase to recognize the proteins that it will phosphorylate (see below).
A second type of protein protein interface forms when two α helices, one from each protein, pair together to form a coiled-coil (Figure 3–41B). This type of protein interface is found in several families of gene regulatory proteins, as discussed in Chapter 7.
The most common way for proteins to interact, however, is by the precise matching of one rigid surface with that of another (Figure 3–41C). Such interactions can be very tight, since a large number of weak bonds can form between two surfaces that match well. For the same reason, such surface surface interactions can be extremely specific, enabling a protein to select just one partner from the many thousands of different proteins found in a cell.
Antibody Binding Sites Are Especially Versatile
All proteins must bind to particular ligands to carry out their various functions. The antibody family is notable for its capacity for tight, highly selective binding (discussed in detail in Chapter 24).