Scientists have been developing new methods for mining this great resource to increase our understanding of cells. In particular, computer-based bioinformatics tools are being combined with robotics and other technologies to allow thousands of proteins to be investigated in a single set of experiments. Proteomics is a term that is often used to describe such research focused on the analysis of large sets of proteins, analogous to the term genomics describing the large-scale analysis of DNA sequences and genes.
A biochemical method based on affinity tagging and mass spectroscopy has proven especially powerful for determining the direct binding interactions between the many different proteins in a cell (discussed in Chapter 8). The results are being tabulated and organized in Internet databases. This allows a cell biologist studying a small set of proteins to readily discover which other proteins in the same cell are likely to bind to, and thus interact with, that set of proteins. When displayed graphically as a protein interaction map, each protein is represented by a box or dot in a two-dimensional network, with a straight line connecting those proteins that have been found to bind to each other.
When hundreds or thousands of proteins are displayed on the same map, the network diagram becomes bewilderingly complicated, serving to illustrate the enormous challenges that face scientists attempting to understand the cell (Figure 3–80). Much more useful are small subsections of these maps, centered on a few proteins of interest.
We have previously described the structure and mode of action of the SCF ubiquitin ligase, using it to illustrate how protein complexes are constructed from interchangeable parts (see Figure 3–71). Figure 3–81 shows a network of protein–protein interactions for the five proteins that form this protein complex in a yeast cell. Four of the subunits of this ligase are located at the bottom right of this figure. The remaining subunit, the F-box protein that serves as its substrate-binding arm, appears as a set of 15 different gene products that bind to adaptor protein 2 (the Skp1 protein). Along the top and left of the figure are sets of additional protein interactions marked with yellow and green shading: as indicated, these protein sets function at the origin of DNA replication, in cell cycle regulation, in methionine synthesis, in the kinetochore, and in vacuolar H+-ATPase assembly. We shall use this figure to explain how such protein interaction maps are used, and what they do and do not mean.