A GTP-Binding Protein Shows How Large Protein Movements Can Be Generated
Detailed structures obtained for one of the GTP-binding protein family members, the EF-Tu protein, provide a good example of how allosteric changes in protein conformations can produce large movements by amplifying a small, local conformational change. As will be discussed in Chapter 6, EF-Tu is an abundant molecule that serves as an elongation factor (hence the EF) in protein synthesis, loading each aminoacyl-tRNA molecule onto the ribosome. EF-Tu contains a Ras-like domain (see Figure 3–67), and the tRNA molecule forms a tight complex with its GTP-bound form. This tRNA molecule can transfer its amino acid to the growing polypeptide chain only after the GTP bound to EF-Tu is hydrolyzed, dissociating the EF-Tu. Since this GTP hydrolysis is triggered by a proper fit of the tRNA to the mRNA molecule on the ribosome, the EF-Tu serves as a factor that discriminates between correct and incorrect mRNA–tRNA pairings (see Figure 6–65).
By comparing the three-dimensional structure of EF-Tu in its GTP-bound and GDP-bound forms, we can see how the repositioning of the tRNA occurs. The dissociation of the inorganic phosphate group (Pi), which follows the reaction GTP → GDP + Pi, causes a shift of a few tenths of a nanometer at the GTP-binding site, just as it does in the Ras protein. This tiny movement, equivalent to a few times the diameter of a hydrogen atom, causes a conformational change to propagate along a crucial piece of α helix, called the switch helix, in the Ras-like domain of the protein. The switch helix seems to serve as a latch that adheres to a specific site in another domain of the molecule, holding the protein in a “shut” conformation. The conformational change triggered by GTP hydrolysis causes the switch helix to detach, allowing separate domains of the protein to swing apart, through a distance of about 4 nm (Figure 3–72). This releases the bound tRNA molecule, allowing its attached amino acid to be used (Figure 3–73).
Notice in this example how cells have exploited a simple chemical change that occurs on the surface of a small protein domain to create a movement 50 times larger. Dramatic shape changes of this type also cause the very large movements that occur in motor proteins, as we discuss next.
Motor Proteins Produce Large Movements in Cells