In some cases, this binding is very tight; in others it is weak and short-lived. But the binding always shows great specificity, in the sense that each protein molecule can usually bind just one or a few molecules out of the many thousands of different types it encounters. The substance that is bound by the protein—whether it is an ion, a small molecule, or a macromolecule such as another protein—is referred to as a ligand for that protein (from the Latin word ligare, meaning “to bind”).
The ability of a protein to bind selectively and with high affinity to a ligand depends on the formation of a set of weak noncovalent bonds—hydrogen bonds, electrostatic attractions, and van der Waals attractions—plus favorable hydrophobic interactions (see Panel 2–3, pp. 94–95). Because each individual bond is weak, effective binding occurs only when many of these bonds form simultaneously. Such binding is possible only if the surface contours of the ligand molecule fit very closely to the protein, matching it like a hand in a glove (Figure 3–37).
The region of a protein that associates with a ligand, known as the ligand’s binding site, usually consists of a cavity in the protein surface formed by a particular arrangement of amino acids. These amino acids can belong to different portions of the polypeptide chain that are brought together when the protein folds (Figure 3–38). Separate regions of the protein surface generally provide binding sites for different ligands, allowing the protein’s activity to be regulated, as we shall see later. And other parts of the protein act as a handle to position the protein in the cell—an example is the SH2 domain discussed previously, which often moves a protein containing it to particular intracellular sites in response to signals.
Although the atoms buried in the interior of the protein have no direct contact with the ligand, they form the framework that gives the surface its contours and its chemical and mechanical properties. Even small changes to the amino acids in the interior of a protein molecule can change its three-dimensional shape enough to destroy a binding site on the surface.
The Surface Conformation of a Protein Determines Its Chemistry
The impressive chemical capabilities of proteins often require that the chemical groups on their surface interact in ways that enhance the chemical reactivity of one or more amino acid side chains. These interactions fall into two main categories.
First, the interaction of neighboring parts of the polypeptide chain may restrict the access of water molecules to that protein’s ligand-binding sites. Because water molecules readily form hydrogen bonds that can compete with ligands for sites on the protein surface, a ligand will form tighter hydrogen bonds (and electrostatic interactions) with a protein if water molecules are kept away. 