Cells contain many other types of symmetric protein complexes, formed from multiple copies of a single polypeptide chain (for example, see Figure 3–20 below).
Many of the proteins in cells contain two or more types of polypeptide chains. Hemoglobin, the protein that carries oxygen in red blood cells, contains two identical α-globin subunits and two identical β-globin subunits, symmetrically arranged (Figure 3–19). Such multisubunit proteins are very common in cells, and they can be very large (Movie 3.6).
Some Globular Proteins Form Long Heelical Filaments
Most of the proteins that we have discussed so far are globular proteins, in which the polypeptide chain folds up into a compact shape like a ball with an irregular surface. Some of these protein molecules can nevertheless assemble to form filaments that may span the entire length of a cell. Most simply, a long chain of identical protein molecules can be constructed if each molecule has a binding site complementary to another region of the surface of the same molecule (Figure 3–20). An actin filament, for example, is a long helical structure produced from many molecules of the protein actin (Figure 3–21). Actin is a globular protein that is very abundant in eukaryotic cells, where it forms one of the major filament systems of the cytoskeleton (discussed in Chapter 16).
We will encounter many helical structures in this book. Why is a helix such a common structure in biology? As we have seen, biological structures are often formed by linking similar subunits into long, repetitive chains. If all the subunits are identical, the neighboring subunits in the chain can often fit together in only one way, adjusting their relative positions to minimize the free energy of the contact between them. As a result, each subunit is positioned in exactly the same way in relation to the next, so that subunit 3 fits onto subunit 2 in the same way that subunit 2 fits onto subunit 1, and so on. Because it is very rare for subunits to join up in a straight line, this arrangement generally results in a helix—a regular structure that resembles a spiral staircase, as illustrated in Figure 3–22. Depending on the twist of the staircase, a helix is said to be either right-handed or left-handed (see Figure 3–22E). Handedness is not affected by turning the helix upside down, but it is reversed if the helix is reflected in the mirror.
The observation that heelices occur commonly in biological structures holds true whether the subunits are small molecules linked together by covalent bonds (for example, the amino acids in an α helix) or large protein molecules that are linked by noncovalent forces (for example, the actin molecules in actin filaments). This is not surprising. 