Proteins come in a wide variety of shapes, and most are between 50 and 2000 amino acids long. Large proteins usually consist of several distinct protein domains—structural units that fold more or less independently of each other, as we discuss below. The structure of even a small domain is complex, and for clarity, several different representations are conventionally used, each of which emphasizes distinct features. As an example, Figure 3–6 presents four representations of a protein domain called SH2, a structure present in many different proteins in eukaryotic cells and involved in cell signaling (see Figure 15–46).
Descriptions of protein structures are aided by the fact that proteins are built up from combinations of several common structural motifs, as we discuss next.
The α Helix and the β Sheet Are Common Folding Patterns
When we compare the three-dimensional structures of many different protein molecules, it becomes clear that, although the overall conformation of each protein is unique, two regular folding patterns are often found within them. Both patterns were discovered more than 60 years ago from studies of hair and silk. The first folding pattern to be discovered, called the α helix, was found in the protein α-keratin, which is abundant in skin and its derivatives—such as hair, nails, and horns. Within a year of the discovery of the α helix, a second folded structure, called a β sheet, was found in the protein fibroin, the major constituent of silk. These two patterns are particularly common because they result from hydrogen-bonding between the N-H and C-O groups in the polypeptide backbone, without involving the side chains of the amino acids. Thus, although incompatible with some amino acid side chains, many different amino acid sequences can form them. In each case, the protein chain adopts a regular, repeating conformation. Figure 3–7 illustrates the detailed structures of these two important conformations, which in ribbon models of proteins are represented by a helical ribbon and by a set of aligned arrows, respectively.
The cores of many proteins contain extensive regions of β sheet. As shown in Figure 3–8, these β sheets can form either from neighboring segments of the polypeptide backbone that run in the same orientation (parallel chains) or from a polypeptide backbone that folds back and forth upon itself, with each section of the chain running in the direction opposite to that of its immediate neighbors (antiparallel chains). Both types of β sheet produce a very rigid structure, held together by hydrogen bonds that connect the peptide bonds in neighboring chains (see Figure 3–7C).