Protein Complexes with Interchangeable Parts Make Efficient Use of Genetic Information
The SCF ubiquitin ligase is a protein complex that binds different “target proteins” at different times in the cell cycle, covalently adding polyubiquitin polypeptide chains to these targets. Its C-shaped structure is formed from five protein subunits, the largest of which serves as a scaffold on which the rest of the complex is built. The structure underlies a remarkable mechanism (Figure 3–71). At one end of the C is an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. At the other end is a substrate-binding arm, a subunit known as an F-box protein. These two subunits are separated by a gap of about 5 nm. When this protein complex is activated, the F-box protein binds to a specific site on a target protein, positioning the protein in the gap so that some of its lysine side chains contact the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. The enzyme can then catalyze repeated additions of ubiquitin polypeptide to these lysines (see Figure 3–71C), producing polyubiquitin chains that mark the target proteins for rapid destruction in a proteasome.
In this manner, specific proteins are targeted for rapid destruction in response to specific signals, thereby helping to drive the cell cycle (discussed in Chapter 17). The timing of the destruction often involves creating a specific pattern of phosphorylation on the target protein that is required for its recognition by the F-box subunit. It also requires the activation of an SCF ubiquitin ligase that carries the appropriate substrate-binding arm. Many of these arms (the F-box subunits) are interchangeable in the protein complex (see Figure 3–71B), and there are more than 70 human genes that encode them.
As emphasized previously, once a successful protein has evolved, its genetic information tends to be duplicated to produce a family of related proteins. Thus, for example, not only are there many F-box proteins—making possible the recognition of different sets of target proteins—but there is also a family of scaffolds (known as cullins) that give rise to a family of SCF-like ubiquitin ligases.
A protein machine like the SCF ubiquitin ligase, with its interchangeable parts, makes economical use of the genetic information in cells. It also creates opportunities for “rapid” evolution, inasmuch as new functions can evolve for the entire complex simply by producing an alternative version of one of its subunits.
Ubiquitin ligases form a diverse family of protein complexes. Some of these complexes are far larger and more complicated than SCF, but their underlying enzymatic function remains the same (Figure 3–71D).