This enables them to avoid contact with the water that surrounds them inside a cell. In contrast, polar groups—such as those belonging to arginine, glutamine, and histidine—tend to arrange themselves near the outside of the molecule, where they can form hydrogen bonds with water and with other polar molecules (Figure 3–5). Polar amino acids buried within the protein are usually hydrogen-bonded to other polar amino acids or to the polypeptide backbone.
Proteins Fold into a Conformation of Lowest Energy
As a result of all of these interactions, most proteins have a particular three-dimensional structure, which is determined by the order of the amino acids in its chain. The final folded structure, or conformation, of any polypeptide chain is generally the one that minimizes its free energy. Biologists have studied protein folding in a test tube using highly purified proteins. Treatment with certain solvents, which disrupt the noncovalent interactions holding the folded chain together, unfolds, or denatures, a protein. This treatment converts the protein into a flexible polypeptide chain that has lost its natural shape. When the denaturing solvent is removed, the protein often refolds spontaneously, or renatures, into its original conformation. This indicates that the amino acid sequence contains all of the information needed for specifying the three-dimensional shape of a protein, a critical point for understanding cell biology.
Most proteins fold up into a single stable conformation. However, this conformation changes slightly when the protein interacts with other molecules in the cell. This change in shape is often crucial to the function of the protein, as we see later.
Although a protein chain can fold into its correct conformation without outside help, in a living cell special proteins called molecular chaperones often assist in protein folding. Molecular chaperones bind to partly folded polypeptide chains and help them progress along the most energetically favorable folding pathway. In the crowded conditions of the cytoplasm, chaperones are required to prevent the temporarily exposed hydrophobic regions in newly synthesized protein chains from associating with each other to form protein aggregates (see p. 355). However, the final three-dimensional shape of the protein is still specified by its amino acid sequence: chaperones simply make reaching the folded state more reliable.