We can group enzymes into functional classes that perform similar chemical reactions (Table 3–1). Each type of enzyme within such a class is highly specific, catalyzing only a single type of reaction. Thus, hexokinase adds a phosphate group to D-glucose but ignores its optical isomer L-glucose; the blood-clotting enzyme thrombin cuts one type of blood protein between a particular arginine and its adjacent glycine and nowhere else, and so on. As discussed in detail in Chapter 2, enzymes work in teams, with the product of one enzyme becoming the substrate for the next. The result is an elaborate network of metabolic pathways that provides the cell with energy and generates the many large and small molecules that the cell needs (see Figure 2–63).
Substrate Binding Is the First Step in Enzyme Catalysis
For a protein that catalyzes a chemical reaction (an enzyme), the binding of each substrate molecule to the protein is an essential prelude. In the simplest case, if we denote the enzyme by E, the substrate by S, and the product by P, the basic reaction path is E + S produces ES which produces EP which produces E + P. There is a limit to the amount of substrate that a single enzyme molecule can process in a given time. Although an increase in the concentration of substrate increases the rate at which product is formed, this rate eventually reaches a maximum value (Figure 3–46). At that point the enzyme molecule is saturated with substrate, and the rate of reaction (Vmax) depends only on how rapidly the enzyme can process the substrate molecule. This maximum rate divided by the enzyme concentration is called the turnover number. Turnover numbers are often about 1000 substrate molecules processed per second per enzyme molecule, although turnover numbers between 1 and 10,000 are known.
The other kinetic parameter frequently used to characterize an enzyme is its Km, the concentration of substrate that allows the reaction to proceed at one-half its maximum rate (0.5 Vmax) (see Figure 3–46). A low Km value means that the enzyme reaches its maximum catalytic rate at a low concentration of substrate and generally indicates that the enzyme binds to its substrate very tightly, whereas a high Km value corresponds to weak binding. The methods used to characterize enzymes in this way are explained in Panel 3–2 (pp. 142–143).
Enzymes Speed Reactions by Selectively Stabilizing Transition States
Enzymes achieve extremely high rates of chemical reaction—rates that are far higher than for any synthetic catalysts. There are several reasons for this efficiency. First, when two molecules need to react, the enzyme greatly increases the local concentration of both of these substrate molecules at the catalytic site, holding them in the correct orientation for the reaction that is to follow.