An α helix is generated when a single polypeptide chain twists around on itself to form a rigid cylinder. A hydrogen bond forms between every fourth peptide bond, linking the C-O of one peptide bond to the N-H of another (see Figure 3–7A). This gives rise to a regular helix with a complete turn every 3.6 amino acids. The SH2 protein domain illustrated in Figure 3–6 contains two α helices, as well as a three-stranded antiparallel β sheet.
Regions of α helix are abundant in proteins located in cell membranes, such as transport proteins and receptors. As we discuss in Chapter 10, those portions of a transmembrane protein that cross the lipid bilayer usually cross as α helices composed largely of amino acids with nonpolar side chains. The polypeptide backbone, which is hydrophilic, is hydrogen-bonded to itself in the α helix and shielded from the hydrophobic lipid environment of the membrane by its protruding nonpolar side chains (see also Figure 3–75A).
In other proteins, α helices wrap around each other to form a particularly stable structure, known as a coiled-coil. This structure can form when the two (or in some cases, three or four) α helices have most of their nonpolar (hydrophobic) side chains on one side, so that they can twist around each other with these side chains facing inward (Figure 3–9). Long rodlike coiled-coils provide the structural framework for many elongated proteins. Examples are α-keratin, which forms the intracellular fibers that reinforce the outer layer of the skin and its appendages, and the myosin molecules responsible for muscle contraction.
Protein Domains Are Modular Units from Which Larger Proteins Are Built
Even a small protein molecule is built from thousands of atoms linked together by precisely oriented covalent and noncovalent bonds. Biologists are aided in visualizing these extremely complicated structures by various graphic and computer-based three-dimensional displays. The student resource site that accompanies this book contains computer-generated images of selected proteins, displayed and rotated on the screen in a variety of formats.
Scientists distinguish four levels of organization in the structure of a protein. The amino acid sequence is known as the primary structure. Stretches of polypeptide chain that form α helices and β sheets constitute the protein’s secondary structure. The full three-dimensional organization of a polypeptide chain is sometimes referred to as the tertiary structure, and if a particular protein molecule is formed as a complex of more than one polypeptide chain, the complete structure is designated as the quaternary structure.