It might be hard to imagine a mechanism that would exclude a molecule as small as water from a protein surface without affecting the access of the ligand itself. However, because of the strong tendency of water molecules to form water–water hydrogen bonds, water molecules exist in a large hydrogen-bonded network (see Panel 2–2, pp. 92–93). In effect, a protein can keep a ligand-binding site dry, increasing that site's reactivity, because it is energetically unfavorable for individual water molecules to break away from this network—as they must do to reach into a crevice on a protein’s surface.
Second, the clustering of neighboring polar amino acid side chains can alter their reactivity. If protein folding forces together a number of negatively charged side chains against their mutual repulsion, for example, the affinity of the site for a positively charged ion is greatly increased. In addition, when amino acid side chains interact with one another through hydrogen bonds, normally unreactive groups (such as the –CH2OH on the serine shown in Figure 3–39) can become reactive, enabling them to be used to make or break selected covalent bonds.
The surface of each protein molecule therefore has a unique chemical reactivity that depends not only on which amino acid side chains are exposed, but also on their exact orientation relative to one another. For this reason, two slightly different conformations of the same protein molecule can differ greatly in their chemistry.
Sequence Comparisons Between Protein Family Members Highlight Crucial Ligand-Binding Sites
As we have described previously, genome sequences allow us to group many of the domains in proteins into families that show clear evidence of their evolution from a common ancestor. The three-dimensional structures of members of the same domain family are remarkably similar. For example, even when the amino acid sequence identity falls to 25%, the backbone atoms in a domain can follow a common protein fold within 0.2 nanometers (2 angstrom).
We can use a method called evolutionary tracing to identify those sites in a protein domain that are the most crucial to the domain’s function. Those sites that bind to other molecules are the most likely to be maintained, unchanged as organisms evolve. Thus, in this method, those amino acids that are unchanged, or nearly unchanged, in all of the known protein family members are mapped onto a model of the three-dimensional structure of one family member. When this is done, the most invariant positions often form one or more clusters on the protein surface, as illustrated in Figure 3–40A for the SH2 domain described previously (see Figure 3–6). These clusters generally correspond to ligand-binding sites.