Reversible protein phosphorylation controls the activity, structure, and cellular localization of both enzymes and many other types of proteins in eukaryotic cells. In fact, this regulation is so extensive that more than one-third of the 10,000 or so proteins in a typical mammalian cell are thought to be phosphorylated at any given time—many with more than one phosphate. As might be expected, the addition and removal of phosphate groups from specific proteins often occur in response to signals that specify some change in a cell’s state. For example, the complicated series of events that takes place as a eukaryotic cell divides is largely timed in this way (discussed in Chapter 17), and many of the signals mediating cell–cell interactions are relayed from the plasma membrane to the nucleus by a cascade of protein phosphorylation events (discussed in Chapter 15).
A Eukaryotic Cell Contains a Large Collection of Protein Kinases and Protein Phosphatases
Protein phosphorylation involves the enzyme-catalyzed transfer of the terminal phosphate group of an ATP molecule to the hydroxyl group on a serine, threonine, or tyrosine side chain of the protein (Figure 3–61). A protein kinase catalyzes this reaction, and the reaction is essentially unidirectional because of the large amount of free energy released when the phosphate–phosphate bond in ATP is broken to produce ADP (discussed in Chapter 2). A protein phosphatase catalyzes the reverse reaction of phosphate removal, or dephosphorylation. Cells contain hundreds of different protein kinases, each responsible for phosphorylating a different protein or set of proteins. There are also many different protein phosphatases; some are highly specific and remove phosphate groups from only one or a few proteins, whereas others act on a broad range of proteins and are targeted to specific substrates by regulatory subunits. The state of phosphorylation of a protein at any moment, and thus its activity, depends on the relative activities of the protein kinases and phosphatases that modify it.
The protein kinases that phosphorylate proteins in eukaryotic cells belong to a very large family of enzymes that share a catalytic (kinase) sequence of about 290 amino acids. The various family members contain different amino acid sequences on either end of the kinase sequence (for example, see Figure 3–10), and often have short amino acid sequences inserted into loops within it. Some of these additional amino acid sequences enable each kinase to recognize the specific set of proteins it phosphorylates, or to bind to structures that localize it in specific regions of the cell. Other parts of the protein regulate the activity of each kinase, so it can be turned on and off in response to different specific signals, as described below.