1. Protein interaction maps are useful for identifying the likely function of previously uncharacterized proteins. Examples are the products of the genes that have thus far only been inferred to exist from the yeast genome sequence, which are the three proteins in the figure that lack a simple three-letter abbreviation (white letters beginning with Y). The three in this diagram are F-box proteins that bind to Skp1; these are therefore likely to function as part of the ubiquitin ligase, serving as substrate-binding arms that recognize different target proteins. However, as we discuss next, neither assignment can be considered certain without additional data.
2. Protein interaction networks need to be interpreted with caution because, as a result of evolution making efficient use of each organism’s genetic information, the same protein can be used as part of different protein complexes that have different types of functions. Thus, although protein A binds to protein B and protein B binds to protein C, proteins A and C need not function in the same process. For example, we know from detailed biochemical studies that the functions of Skp1 in the kinetochore and in vacuolar H+-ATPase assembly (yellow shading) are separate from its function in the SCF ubiquitin ligase. In fact, only the remaining three functions of Skp1 illustrated in the diagram—methionine synthesis, cell cycle regulation, and origin of replication (green shading)—involve ubiquitylation.
3. In cross-species comparisons, those proteins displaying similar patterns of interactions in the two protein interaction maps are likely to have the same function in the cell. Thus, as scientists generate more and more highly detailed maps for multiple organisms, the results will become increasingly useful for inferring protein function. These map comparisons will be a particularly powerful tool for deciphering the functions of human proteins, because a vast amount of direct information about protein function can be obtained from genetic engineering, mutational, and genetic analyses in experimental organisms—such as yeast, worms, and flies—that are not feasible in humans.
What does the future hold? There are likely to be on the order of 10,000 different proteins in a typical human cell, each of which interacts with 5 to 10 different partners. Despite the enormous progress made in recent years, we cannot yet claim to understand even the simplest known cells, such as the small Mycoplasma bacterium formed from only about 500 gene products (see Figure 1–10). How then can we hope to understand a human? 