And as we have also seen, when a substrate binds to an enzyme, bonds in the substrate are often distorted, changing the substrate shape. These changes, along with mechanical forces, drive a substrate toward a particular transition state (Figure 3–52C). Finally, like lysozyme, many enzymes participate intimately in the reaction by transiently forming a covalent bond between the substrate and a side chain of the enzyme. Subsequent steps in the reaction restore the side chain to its original state, so that the enzyme remains unchanged after the reaction (see also Figure 2–48).
Tightly Bound Small Molecules Add Extra Functions to Proteins
Although we have emphasized the versatility of enzymes—and proteins in general—as chains of amino acids that perform remarkable functions, there are many instances in which the amino acids by themselves are not enough. Just as humans employ tools to enhance and extend the capabilities of their hands, enzymes and other proteins often use small nonprotein molecules to perform functions that would be difficult or impossible to do with amino acids alone. Thus, enzymes frequently have a small molecule or metal atom tightly associated with their active site that assists with their catalytic function. Carboxypeptidase, for example, an enzyme that cuts polypeptide chains, carries a tightly bound zinc ion in its active site. During the cleavage of a peptide bond by carboxypeptidase, the zinc ion forms a transient bond with one of the substrate atoms, thereby assisting the hydrolysis reaction. In other enzymes, a small organic molecule serves a similar purpose. Such organic molecules are often referred to as coenzymes. An example is biotin, which is found in enzymes that transfer a carboxylate group (–COO–) from one molecule to another (see Figure 2–40). Biotin participates in these reactions by forming a transient covalent bond to the –COO– group to be transferred, being better suited to this function than any of the amino acids used to make proteins. Because it cannot be synthesized by humans, and must therefore be supplied in small quantities in our diet, biotin is a vitamin. Many other coenzymes are either vitamins or derivatives of vitamins (Table 3–2).
Other proteins also frequently require specific small-molecule adjuncts to function properly. Thus, the signal receptor protein rhodopsin, which is made by the photoreceptor cells in the retina, detects light by means of a small molecule, retinal, embedded in the protein (Figure 3–53A). Retinal, which is derived from vitamin A, changes its shape when it absorbs a photon of light, and this change causes the protein to trigger a cascade of enzymatic reactions that eventually lead to an electrical signal being carried to the brain. 