As an alternative to this induced fit model for a cooperative allosteric transition, we can view such a symmetric enzyme as having only two possible conformations, corresponding to the “enzyme on” and “enzyme off” structures in Figure 3–60. In this view, ligand binding perturbs an all-or-none equilibrium between these two states, thereby changing the proportion of active molecules. Both models represent true and useful concepts.
Many Changes in Proteins Are Driven by Protein Phosphorylation
Proteins are regulated by more than the reversible binding of other molecules. A second method that eukaryotic cells use extensively to regulate a protein’s function is the covalent addition of a smaller molecule to one or more of its amino acid side chains. The most common such regulatory modification in higher eukaryotes is the addition of a phosphate group. We shall therefore use protein phosphorylation to illustrate some of the general principles involved in the control of protein function through the modification of amino acid side chains.
A phosphorylation event can affect the protein that is modified in three important ways. First, because each phosphate group carries two negative charges, the enzyme-catalyzed addition of a phosphate group to a protein can cause a major conformational change in the protein by, for example, attracting a cluster of positively charged amino acid side chains. This can, in turn, affect the binding of ligands elsewhere on the protein surface, dramatically changing the protein’s activity. When a second enzyme removes the phosphate group, the protein returns to its original conformation and restores its initial activity.
Second, an attached phosphate group can form part of a structure that the binding sites of other proteins recognize. As previously discussed, the SH2 domain binds to a short peptide sequence containing a phosphorylated tyrosine side chain (see Figure 3–40B). More than ten other common domains provide binding sites for attaching their protein to phosphorylated peptides in other protein molecules, each recognizing a phosphorylated amino acid side chain in a different protein context. Third, the addition of a phosphate group can mask a binding site that otherwise holds two proteins together, and thereby disrupt protein–protein interactions. As a result, protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation very often drive the regulated assembly and disassembly of protein complexes (see, for example, Figure 15–11).