The relationships shown in Figures 3–57 and 3–58 apply to all proteins, and they underlie all of cell biology. The principle seems so obvious in retrospect that we now take it for granted. But the discovery of linkage in studies of a few enzymes in the 1950s, followed by an extensive analysis of allosteric mechanisms in proteins in the early 1960s, had a revolutionary effect on our understanding of biology. Since molecule X in these examples binds at a site on the enzyme that is distinct from the site where catalysis occurs, it need not have any chemical relationship to the substrate that binds at the active site. Moreover, as we have just seen, for enzymes that are regulated in this way, molecule X can either turn the enzyme on (positive regulation) or turn it off (negative regulation). By such a mechanism, allosteric proteins serve as general switches that, in principle, can allow one molecule in a cell to affect the fate of any other.
Symmetric Protein Assemblies Produce Cooperative Allosteric Transitions
A single-subunit enzyme that is regulated by negative feedback can at most decrease from 90% to about 10% activity in response to a 100-fold increase in the concentration of an inhibitory ligand that it binds (Figure 3–59, red line). Responses of this type are apparently not sharp enough for optimal cell regulation, and most enzymes that are turned on or off by ligand binding consist of symmetric assemblies of identical subunits. With this arrangement, the binding of a molecule of ligand to a single site on one subunit can promote an allosteric change in the entire assembly that helps the neighboring subunits bind the same ligand. As a result, a cooperative allosteric transition occurs (Figure 3–59, blue line), allowing a relatively small change in ligand concentration in the cell to switch the whole assembly from an almost fully active to an almost fully inactive conformation (or vice versa).
The principles involved in a cooperative “all-or-none” transition are the same for all proteins, whether or not they are enzymes. Thus, for example, they are critical for the efficient uptake and release of O2 by hemoglobin in our blood. But they are perhaps easiest to visualize for an enzyme that forms a symmetric dimer. In the example shown in Figure 3–60, the first molecule of an inhibitory ligand binds with great difficulty since its binding disrupts an energetically favorable interaction between the two identical monomers in the dimer. A second molecule of inhibitory ligand now binds more easily, however, because its binding restores the energetically favorable monomer–monomer contacts of a symmetric dimer (this also completely inactivates the enzyme).