Another complex macromolecular aggregate that can reassemble from its component parts is the bacterial ribosome. This structure is composed of about 55 different protein molecules and 3 different rRNA molecules. Incubating a mixture of the individual components under appropriate conditions in a test tube causes them to spontaneously re-form the original structure. Most importantly, such reconstituted ribosomes are able to catalyze protein synthesis. As might be expected, the reassembly of ribosomes follows a specific pathway: after certain proteins have bound to the RNA, this complex is then recognized by other proteins, and so on, until the structure is complete.
It is still not clear how some of the more elaborate self-assembly processes are regulated. Many structures in the cell, for example, seem to have a precisely defined length that is many times greater than that of their component macromolecules. How such length determination is achieved is in many cases a mystery. In the simplest case, a long core protein or other macromolecule provides a scaffold that determines the extent of the final assembly. This is the mechanism that determines the length of the TMV particle, where the RNA chain provides the core. Similarly, a core protein interacting with actin is thought to determine the length of the thin filaments in muscle.
Assembly Factors Often Aid the Formation of Complex Biological Structures
Not all cellular structures held together by noncovalent bonds self-assemble. A cilium, or a myofibril of a muscle cell, for example, cannot form spontaneously from a solution of its component macromolecules. In these cases, part of the assembly information is provided by special enzymes and other proteins that perform the function of templates, serving as assembly factors that guide construction but take no part in the final assembled structure.
Even relatively simple structures may lack some of the ingredients necessary for their own assembly. In the formation of certain bacterial viruses, for example, the head, which is composed of many copies of a single protein subunit, is assembled on a temporary scaffold composed of a second protein that is produced by the virus. Because the second protein is absent from the final viral particle, the head structure cannot spontaneously reassemble once it has been taken apart. Other examples are known in which proteolytic cleavage is an essential and irreversible step in the normal assembly process. This is even the case for some small protein assemblies, including the structural protein collagen and the hormone insulin (Figure 3–30). From these relatively simple examples, it seems certain that the assembly of a structure as complex as a cilium will involve a temporal and spatial ordering that is imparted by numerous other components.