Another example of a protein with a nonprotein portion is hemoglobin (see Figure 3–19). Each molecule of hemoglobin carries four heme groups, ring-shaped molecules each with a single central iron atom (Figure 3–53B). Heme gives hemoglobin (and blood) its red color. By binding reversibly to oxygen gas through its iron atom, heme enables hemoglobin to pick up oxygen in the lungs and release it in the tissues.
Sometimes these small molecules are attached covalently and permanently to their protein, thereby becoming an integral part of the protein molecule itself. We shall see in Chapter 10 that proteins are often anchored to cell membranes through covalently attached lipid molecules. And membrane proteins exposed on the surface of the cell, as well as proteins secreted outside the cell, are often modified by the covalent addition of sugars and oligosaccharides.
Multienzyme Complexes Help to Increase the Rate of Cell Metabolism
The efficiency of enzymes in accelerating chemical reactions is crucial to the maintenance of life. Cells, in effect, must race against the unavoidable processes of decay, which—if left unattended—cause macromolecules to run downhill toward greater and greater disorder. If the rates of desirable reactions were not greater than the rates of competing side reactions, a cell would soon die. We can get some idea of the rate at which cell metabolism proceeds by measuring the rate of ATP utilization. A typical mammalian cell “turns over” (i.e., hydrolyzes and restores by phosphorylation) its entire ATP pool once every 1 or 2 minutes. For each cell, this turnover represents the utilization of roughly 107 molecules of ATP per second (or, for the human body, about 1 gram of ATP every minute).
The rates of reactions in cells are rapid because enzyme catalysis is so effective. Some enzymes have become so efficient that there is no possibility of further useful improvement. The factor that limits the reaction rate is no longer the enzyme’s intrinsic speed of action; rather, it is the frequency with which the enzyme collides with its substrate. Such a reaction is said to be diffusion-limited (see Panel 3 2, pp. 142–143).
The amount of product produced by an enzyme will depend on the concentration of both the enzyme and its substrate. If a sequence of reactions is to occur extremely rapidly, each metabolic intermediate and enzyme involved must be present in high concentration. However, given the enormous number of different reactions performed by a cell, there are limits to the concentrations that can be achieved. In fact, most metabolites are present in micromolar (10–6 M) concentrations, and most enzyme concentrations are much lower. How is it possible, therefore, to maintain very fast metabolic rates?