Sugars are particularly important fuel molecules, and they are oxidized in small controlled steps to carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (Figure 2–45). In this section, we trace the major steps in the breakdown, or catabolism, of sugars and show how they produce ATP, NADH, and other activated carrier molecules in animal cells. A very similar pathway also operates in plants, fungi, and many bacteria. As we shall see, the oxidation of fatty acids is equally important for cells. Other molecules, such as proteins, can also serve as energy sources when they are funneled through appropriate enzymatic pathways.
Glycolysis Is a Central ATP-Producing Pathway
The major process for oxidizing sugars is the sequence of reactions known as glycolysis—from the Greek glukus, “sweet,” and lusis, “rupture.” Glycolysis produces ATP without the involvement of molecular oxygen (O2 gas). It occurs in the cytosol of most cells, including many anaerobic microorganisms. Glycolysis probably evolved early in the history of life, before photosynthetic organisms introduced oxygen into the atmosphere. During glycolysis, a glucose molecule with six carbon atoms is converted into two molecules of pyruvate, each of which contains three carbon atoms. For each glucose molecule, two molecules of ATP are hydrolyzed to provide energy to drive the early steps, but four molecules of ATP are produced in the later steps. At the end of glycolysis, there is consequently a net gain of two molecules of ATP for each glucose molecule broken down. Two molecules of the activated carrier NADH are also produced.
The glycolytic pathway is outlined in Figure 2–46 and shown in more detail in Panel 2 8 (pp. 104–105) and Movie 2.5. Glycolysis involves a sequence of 10 separate reactions, each producing a different sugar intermediate and each catalyzed by a different enzyme. Like most enzymes, these have names ending in ase—such as isomerase and dehydrogenase—to indicate the type of reaction they catalyze.
Although no molecular oxygen is used in glycolysis, oxidation occurs, in that electrons are removed by NAD+ (producing NADH) from some of the carbons derived from the glucose molecule. The stepwise nature of the process releases the energy of oxidation in small packets, so that much of it can be stored in activated carrier molecules rather than all of it being released as heat (see Figure 2–45). Thus, some of the energy released by oxidation drives the direct synthesis of ATP molecules from ADP and inorganic phosphate, and some remains with the electrons in the electron carrier NADH.
Two molecules of NADH are formed per molecule of glucose in the course of glycolysis. In aerobic organisms, these NADH molecules donate their electrons to the electron-transport chain described in Chapter 14, and the NAD+ formed from the NADH is used again for glycolysis (see step 6 in Panel 2 8, pp. 104–105).