Although virtually all cells contain the enzymes of glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, lipid synthesis and breakdown, and amino acid metabolism, the levels of these processes required in different tissues are not the same. For example, nerve cells, which are probably the most fastidious cells in the body, maintain almost no reserves of glycogen or fatty acids and rely almost entirely on a constant supply of glucose from the bloodstream. In contrast, liver cells supply glucose to actively contracting muscle cells and recycle the lactic acid produced by muscle cells back into glucose. All types of cells have their distinctive metabolic traits, and they cooperate extensively in the normal state, as well as in response to stress and starvation. One might think that the whole system would need to be so finely balanced that any minor upset, such as a temporary change in dietary intake, would be disastrous.
In fact, the metabolic balance of a cell is amazingly stable. Whenever the balance is perturbed, the cell reacts so as to restore the initial state. The cell can adapt and continue to function during starvation or disease. Mutations of many kinds can damage or even eliminate particular reaction pathways, and yet—provided that certain minimum requirements are met—the cell survives. It does so because an elaborate network of control mechanisms regulates and coordinates the rates of all of its reactions. These controls rest, ultimately, on the remarkable abilities of proteins to change their shape and their chemistry in response to changes in their immediate environment. The principles that underlie how large molecules such as proteins are built and the chemistry behind their regulation will be our next concern.
Summary
Glucose and other food molecules are broken down by controlled stepwise oxidation to provide chemical energy in the form of ATP and NADH. There are three main sets of reactions that act in series, the products of each being the starting material for the next: glycolysis (which occurs in the cytosol), the citric acid cycle (in the mitochondrial matrix), and oxidative phosphorylation (on the inner mitochondrial membrane). The intermediate products of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle are used both as sources of metabolic energy and to produce many of the small molecules used as the raw materials for biosynthesis. Cells store sugar molecules as glycogen in animals and starch in plants; both plants and animals also use fats extensively as a food store. These storage materials in turn serve as a major source of food for humans, along with the proteins that comprise the majority of the dry mass of most of the cells in the foods we eat.