Forming a sequential pathway is not adequate for many purposes. Often the desired pathway is simply X produces Y, without further conversion of Y to some other product. Fortunately, there are other more general ways of using enzymes to couple reactions together. These often involve the activated carrier molecules that we discuss next.
Activated Carrier Molecules Are Essential for Biosynthesis
The energy released by the oxidation of food molecules must be stored temporarily before it can be channeled into the construction of the many other molecules needed by the cell. In most cases, the energy is stored as chemical-bond energy in a small set of activated “carrier molecules,” which contain one or more energy rich covalent bonds. These molecules diffuse rapidly throughout the cell and thereby carry their bond energy from sites of energy generation to the sites where the energy will be used for biosynthesis and other cell activities (Figure 2–31).
The activated carriers store energy in an easily exchangeable form, either as a readily transferable chemical group or as electrons held at a high energy level, and they can serve a dual role as a source of both energy and chemical groups in biosynthetic reactions. For historical reasons, these molecules are also sometimes referred to as coenzymes. The most important of the activated carrier molecules are ATP and two molecules that are closely related to each other, NADH and NADPH. Cells use such activated carrier molecules like money to pay for reactions that otherwise could not take place.
The Formation of an Activated Carrier Is Coupled to an Energetically Favorable Reaction
Coupling mechanisms require enzymes and are fundamental to all the energy transactions of the cell. The nature of a coupled reaction is illustrated by a mechanical analogy in Figure 2–32, in which an energetically favorable chemical reaction is represented by rocks falling from a cliff. The energy of falling rocks would normally be entirely wasted in the form of heat generated by friction when the rocks hit the ground (see the falling-brick diagram in Figure 2–17). By careful design, however, part of this energy could be used instead to drive a paddle wheel that lifts a bucket of water (Figure 2–32B). Because the rocks can now reach the ground only after moving the paddle wheel, we say that the energetically favorable reaction of rock falling has been directly coupled to the energetically unfavorable reaction of lifting the bucket of water. Note that because part of the energy is used to do work in Figure 2–32B, the rocks hit the ground with less velocity than in Figure 2–32A, and correspondingly less energy is dissipated as heat.