Some Polar Molecules Form Acids and Bases in Water
One of the simplest kinds of chemical reaction, and one that has profound significance in cells, takes place when a molecule containing a highly polar covalent bond between a hydrogen and another atom dissolves in water. The hydrogen atom in such a molecule has given up its electron almost entirely to the companion atom, and so exists as an almost naked positively charged hydrogen nucleus—in other words, a proton (H+). When the polar molecule becomes surrounded by water molecules, the proton will be attracted to the partial negative charge on the O atom of an adjacent water molecule. This proton can easily dissociate from its original partner and associate instead with the oxygen atom of the water molecule, generating a hydronium ion (H3O+) (Figure 2–5A). The reverse reaction also takes place very readily, so in the aqueous solution protons are constantly flitting to and fro between one molecule and another.
Substances that release protons when they dissolve in water, thus forming H3O+, are termed acids. The higher the concentration of H3O+, the more acidic the solution. H3O+ is present even in pure water, at a concentration of 10–7 molar, as a result of the movement of protons from one water molecule to another (Figure 2–5B). By convention, the H3O+ concentration is usually referred to as the H+ concentration, even though most protons in an aqueous solution are present as H3O+. To avoid the use of unwieldy numbers, the concentration of H3O+ is expressed using a logarithmic scale called the pH scale. Pure water has a pH of 7.0 and is said to be neutral—that is, neither acidic (pH less than 7) nor basic (pH greater than 7).
Acids are characterized as being strong or weak, depending on how readily they give up their protons to water. Strong acids, such as hydrochloric acid (HCl), lose their protons quickly. Acetic acid, on the other hand, is a weak acid because it holds on to its proton more tightly when dissolved in water. Many of the acids important in the cell—such as molecules containing a carboxyl (COOH) group—are weak acids (see Panel 2 2, pp. 92–93).
Because the proton of a hydronium ion can be passed readily to many types of molecules in cells, altering their character, the concentration of H3O+ inside a cell (the acidity) must be closely regulated. Acids—especially weak acids—will give up their protons more readily if the concentration of H3O+ in solution is low and will tend to receive them back if the concentration in solution is high.