Similar processes occur in cells, where enzymes play the role of the paddle wheel. By mechanisms that we discuss later in this chapter, enzymes couple an energetically favorable reaction, such as the oxidation of foodstuffs, to an energetically unfavorable reaction, such as the generation of an activated carrier molecule. In this example, the amount of heat released by the oxidation reaction is reduced by exactly the amount of energy stored in the energy-rich covalent bonds of the activated carrier molecule. And the activated carrier molecule picks up a packet of energy of a size sufficient to power a chemical reaction elsewhere in the cell.
ATP Is the Most Widely Used Activated Carrier Molecule
The most important and versatile of the activated carriers in cells is ATP (adenosine triphosphate). Just as the energy stored in the raised bucket of water in Figure 2–32B can drive a wide variety of hydraulic machines, ATP is a convenient and versatile store, or currency, of energy used to drive a variety of chemical reactions in cells. ATP is synthesized in an energetically unfavorable phosphorylation reaction in which a phosphate group is added to ADP (adenosine diphosphate). When required, ATP gives up its energy packet through its energetically favorable hydrolysis to ADP and inorganic phosphate (Figure 2–33). The regenerated ADP is then available to be used for another round of the phosphorylation reaction that forms ATP.
The energetically favorable reaction of ATP hydrolysis is coupled to many otherwise unfavorable reactions through which other molecules are synthesized. Many of these coupled reactions involve the transfer of the terminal phosphate in ATP to another molecule, as illustrated by the phosphorylation reaction in Figure 2–34.
As the most abundant activated carrier in cells, ATP is the principle energy currency. To give just two examples, it supplies energy for many of the pumps that transport substances into and out of the cell (discussed in Chapter 11), and it powers the molecular motors that enable muscle cells to contract and nerve cells to transport materials from one end of their long axons to another (discussed in Chapter 16).
Energy Stored in ATP Is Often Harnessed to Join Two Molecules Together
We have previously discussed one way in which an energetically favorable reaction can be coupled to an energetically unfavorable reaction, X produces Y, so as to enable it to occur. In that scheme, a second enzyme catalyzes the energetically favorable reaction Y produces Z, pulling all of the X to Y in the process. But when the required product is Y and not Z, this mechanism is not useful
A typical biosynthetic reaction is one in which two molecules, A and B, are joined together to produce A–B in the energetically unfavorable condensation reaction A–H + B–OH produces A–B + H2O