In total, the complete oxidation of a molecule of glucose to H2O and CO2 is used by the cell to produce about 30 molecules of ATP. In contrast, only 2 molecules of ATP are produced per molecule of glucose by glycolysis alone.
Amino Acids and Nucleotides Are Part of the Nitrogen Cycle
So far we have concentrated mainly on carbohydrate metabolism and have not yet considered the metabolism of nitrogen or sulfur. These two elements are important constituents of biological macromolecules. Nitrogen and sulfur atoms pass from compound to compound and between organisms and their environment in a series of reversible cycles.
Although molecular nitrogen is abundant in the Earth’s atmosphere, nitrogen is chemically unreactive as a gas. Only a few living species are able to incorporate it into organic molecules, a process called nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen fixation occurs in certain microorganisms and by some geophysical processes, such as lightning discharge. It is essential to the biosphere as a whole, for without it life could not exist on this planet. Only a small fraction of the nitrogenous compounds in today’s organisms, however, is due to fresh products of nitrogen fixation from the atmosphere. Most organic nitrogen has been in circulation for some time, passing from one living organism to another. Thus, present-day nitrogen-fixing reactions can be said to perform a “topping-up” function for the total nitrogen supply.
Vertebrates receive virtually all of their nitrogen from their dietary intake of proteins and nucleic acids. In the body, these macromolecules are broken down to amino acids and the components of nucleotides, and the nitrogen they contain is used to produce new proteins and nucleic acids—or other molecules. About half of the 20 amino acids found in proteins are essential amino acids for vertebrates (Figure 2–62), which means that they cannot be synthesized from other ingredients of the diet. The other amino acids can be so synthesized, using a variety of raw materials, including intermediates of the citric acid cycle. The essential amino acids are made by plants and other organisms, usually by long and energetically expensive pathways that have been lost in the course of vertebrate evolution.
The nucleotides needed to make RNA and DNA can be synthesized using specialized biosynthetic pathways. All of the nitrogens in the purine and pyrimidine bases (as well as some of the carbons) are derived from the plentiful amino acids glutamine, aspartic acid, and glycine, whereas the ribose and deoxyribose sugars are derived from glucose. There are no “essential nucleotides” that must be provided in the diet.