The amount of concentration difference that is needed to compensate for a given decrease in chemical-bond energy (and accompanying heat release) is not intuitively obvious. In the late nineteenth century, the relationship was determined through a thermodynamic analysis that makes it possible to separate the concentration-dependent and the concentration-independent parts of the free-energy change, as we describe next.
The Standard Free-Energy Change, delta G°, Makes It Possible to Compare the Energetics of Different Reactions
Because delta G depends on the concentrations of the molecules in the reaction mixture at any given time, it is not a particularly useful value for comparing the relative energies of different types of reactions. To place reactions on a comparable basis, we need to turn to the standard free-energy change of a reaction, delta G°. The delta G° is the change in free energy under a standard condition, defined as that where the concentrations of all the reactants are set to the same fixed value of 1 mole/liter. Defined in this way, delta G° depends only on the intrinsic characters of the reacting molecules.
For the simple reaction Y produces X at 37°C, delta G° is related to delta G as follows:
delta G = delta G° + RT ln concentration of X over the concentration of Y
where delta G is in kilojoules per mole, [Y] and [X] denote the concentrations of Y and X in moles per liter, ln is the natural logarithm, and RT is the product of the gas constant, R, and the absolute temperature, T. At 37°C, RT = 2.58 Jules per mole. (A mole is 6 × 10 to the 23 molecules of a substance.)
A large body of thermodynamic data has been collected that has made it possible to determine the standard free-energy change, delta G°, for the important metabolic reactions of a cell. Given these delta G° values, combined with additional information about metabolite concentrations and reaction pathways, it is possible to quantitatively predict the course of most biological reactions.
The Equilibrium Constant and delta G° Are Readily Derived from Each Other
Inspection of the above equation reveals that the delta G equals the value of delta G° when the concentrations of Y and X are equal. But as any favorable reaction proceeds, the concentrations of the products will increase as the concentration of the substrates decreases. This change in relative concentrations will cause [X]/[Y] to become increasingly large, making the initially favorable delta G less and less negative (the logarithm of a number x is positive for x > 1, negative for x < 1, and zero for x=1). Eventually, when delta G = 0, a chemical equilibrium will be attained; here there is no net change in free energy to drive the reaction in either direction, inasmuch as the concentration effect just balances the push given to the reaction by delta G°. As a result, the ratio of product to substrate reaches a constant value at chemical equilibrium (Figure 2–30).