Two opposing streams of chemical reactions occur in cells: (1) the catabolic pathways break down foodstuffs into smaller molecules, thereby generating both a useful form of energy for the cell and some of the small molecules that the cell needs as building blocks, and (2) the anabolic, or biosynthetic, pathways use the small molecules and the energy harnessed by catabolism to drive the synthesis of the many other molecules that form the cell. Together these two sets of reactions constitute the metabolism of the cell (Figure 2–14).
The details of cell metabolism form the traditional subject of biochemistry and most of them need not concern us here. But the general principles by which cells obtain energy from their environment and use it to create order are central to cell biology. We begin with a discussion of why a constant input of energy is needed to sustain all living things.
Biological Order Is Made Possible by the Release of Heat Energy from Cells
The universal tendency of things to become disordered is a fundamental law of physics—the second law of thermodynamics—which states that in the universe, or in any isolated system (a collection of matter that is completely isolated from the rest of the universe), the degree of disorder always increases. This law has such profound implications for life that we will restate it in several ways.
For example, we can present the second law in terms of probability by stating that systems will change spontaneously toward those arrangements that have the greatest probability. If we consider a box of 100 coins all lying heads up, a series of accidents that disturbs the box will tend to move the arrangement toward a mixture of 50 heads and 50 tails. The reason is simple: there is a huge number of possible arrangements of the individual coins in the mixture that can achieve the 50–50 result, but only one possible arrangement that keeps all of the coins oriented heads up. Because the 50–50 mixture is therefore the most probable, we say that it is more “disordered.” For the same reason, it is a common experience that one’s living space will become increasingly disordered without intentional effort: the movement toward disorder is a spontaneous process, requiring a periodic effort to reverse it (Figure 2–15).
The amount of disorder in a system can be quantified and expressed as the entropy of the system: the greater the disorder, the greater the entropy. Thus, another way to express the second law of thermodynamics is to say that systems will change spontaneously toward arrangements with greater entropy.