Most Animal Cells Derive Their Energy from Fatty Acids Between Meals
After a meal, most of the energy that an animal needs is derived from sugars obtained from food. Excess sugars, if any, are used to replenish depleted glycogen stores, or to synthesize fats as a food store. But soon the fat stored in adipose tissue is called into play, and by the morning after an overnight fast, fatty acid oxidation generates most of the ATP we need.
Low glucose levels in the blood trigger the breakdown of fats for energy production. As illustrated in Figure 2–54, the triacylglycerols stored in fat droplets in adipocytes are hydrolyzed to produce fatty acids and glycerol, and the fatty acids released are transferred to cells in the body through the bloodstream. While animals readily convert sugars to fats, they cannot convert fatty acids to sugars. Instead, the fatty acids are oxidized directly.
Sugars and Fats Are Both Degraded to Acetyl CoA in Mitochondria
In aerobic metabolism, the pyruvate that was produced by glycolysis from sugars in the cytosol is transported into the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. There, it is rapidly decarboxylated by a giant complex of three enzymes, called the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. The products of pyruvate decarboxylation are a molecule of CO2 (a waste product), a molecule of NADH, and acetyl CoA (see Panel 2 9).
The fatty acids imported from the bloodstream are moved into mitochondria, where all of their oxidation takes place (Figure 2–55). Each molecule of fatty acid (as the activated molecule fatty acyl CoA) is broken down completely by a cycle of reactions that trims two carbons at a time from its carboxyl end, generating one molecule of acetyl CoA for each turn of the cycle. A molecule of NADH and a molecule of FADH2 are also produced in this process (Figure 2–56).
Sugars and fats are the major energy sources for most nonphotosynthetic organisms, including humans. However, most of the useful energy that can be extracted from the oxidation of both types of foodstuffs remains stored in the acetyl CoA molecules that are produced by the two types of reactions just described. The citric acid cycle of reactions, in which the acetyl group (–COCH3) in acetyl CoA is oxidized to CO2 and H2O, is therefore central to the energy metabolism of aerobic organisms. In eukaryotes, these reactions all take place in mitochondria. We should therefore not be surprised to discover that the mitochondrion is the place where most of the ATP is produced in animal cells. In contrast, aerobic bacteria carry out all of their reactions, including the citric acid cycle, in a single compartment, the cytosol.