Enzymes Lower the Activation-Energy Barriers That Block Chemical Reactions
Consider the reaction 
paper reacts with O2 to produce smoke and ashes and heat and CO2 and H2O
Once ignited, the paper burns readily, releasing to the atmosphere both energy as heat and water and carbon dioxide as gases. The reaction is irreversible, since the smoke and ashes never spontaneously retrieve these entities from the heated atmosphere and reconstitute themselves into paper. When the paper burns, its chemical energy is dissipated as heat—not lost from the universe, since energy can never be created or destroyed, but irretrievably dispersed in the chaotic random thermal motions of molecules. At the same time, the atoms and molecules of the paper become dispersed and disordered. In the language of thermodynamics, there has been a loss of free energy; that is, of energy that can be harnessed to do work or drive chemical reactions. This loss reflects a reduction of orderliness in the way the energy and molecules were stored in the paper.
We shall discuss free energy in more detail shortly, but the general principle is clear enough intuitively: chemical reactions proceed spontaneously only in the direction that leads to a loss of free energy. In other words, the spontaneous direction for any reaction is the direction that goes “downhill,” where a “downhill” reaction is one that is energetically favorable.
Although the most energetically favorable form of carbon under ordinary conditions is CO2, and that of hydrogen is H2O, a living organism does not disappear in a puff of smoke, and the paper book in your hands does not burst into flames. This is because the molecules both in the living organism and in the book are in a relatively stable state, and they cannot be changed to a state of lower energy without an input of energy: in other words, a molecule requires activation energy—a kick over an energy barrier—before it can undergo a chemical reaction that leaves it in a more stable state (Figure 2–21). In the case of a burning book, the activation energy can be provided by the heat of a lighted match. For the molecules in the watery solution inside a cell, the kick is delivered by an unusually energetic random collision with surrounding molecules—collisions that become more violent as the temperature is raised.