There is an indirect pathway that allows A H and B–OH to form A B, in which a coupling to ATP hydrolysis makes the reaction go. Here, energy from ATP hydrolysis is first used to convert B–OH to a higher-energy intermediate compound, which then reacts directly with A H to give A B. The simplest possible mechanism involves the transfer of a phosphate from ATP to B–OH to make B–O–PO3, in which case the reaction pathway contains only two steps:
1. B–OH + ATP produces B–O–PO3 + ADP
2. A H + B–O–PO3 produces  A B + Pi
Net result: B–OH + ATP + A H produces  A B + ADP + Pi
The condensation reaction, which by itself is energetically unfavorable, is forced to occur by being directly coupled to ATP hydrolysis in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction pathway (Figure 2–35A). A biosynthetic reaction of exactly this type synthesizes the amino acid glutamine (Figure 2–35B). We will see shortly that similar (but more complex) mechanisms are also used to produce nearly all of the large molecules of the cell.
NADH and NADPH Are Important Electron Carriers
Other important activated carrier molecules participate in oxidation reduction reactions and are commonly part of coupled reactions in cells. These activated carriers are specialized to carry electrons held at a high energy level (sometimes called “high-energy” electrons) and hydrogen atoms. The most important of these electron carriers are NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and the closely related molecule NADP+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). Each picks up a “packet of energy” corresponding to two electrons plus a proton (H+), and they are thereby converted to NADH (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADPH (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate), respectively (Figure 2–36). These molecules can therefore be regarded as carriers of hydride ions (the H+ plus two electrons, or H minus).
Like ATP, NADPH is an activated carrier that participates in many important biosynthetic reactions that would otherwise be energetically unfavorable. The NADPH is produced according to the general scheme shown in Figure 2–36A. During a special set of energy-yielding catabolic reactions, two hydrogen atoms are removed from a substrate molecule. Both electrons but just one proton (that is, a hydride ion, H minus) are added to the nicotinamide ring of NADP+ to form NADPH; the second proton (H+) is released into solution. This is a typical oxidation reduction reaction, in which the substrate is oxidized and NADP+ is reduced.