Fermentations Produce ATP in the Absence of Oxygen
For most animal and plant cells, glycolysis is only a prelude to the final stage of the breakdown of food molecules. In these cells, the pyruvate formed by glycolysis is rapidly transported into the mitochondria, where it is converted into CO2 plus acetyl CoA, whose acetyl group is then completely oxidized to CO2 and H2O.
In contrast, for many anaerobic organisms—which do not utilize molecular oxygen and can grow and divide without it—glycolysis is the principal source of the cell’s ATP. Certain animal tissues, such as skeletal muscle, can also continue to function when molecular oxygen is limited. In these anaerobic conditions, the pyruvate and the NADH electrons stay in the cytosol. The pyruvate is converted into products excreted from the cell—for example, into ethanol and CO2 in the yeasts used in brewing and breadmaking, or into lactate in muscle. In this process, the NADH gives up its electrons and is converted back into NAD+. This regeneration of NAD+ is required to maintain the reactions of glycolysis (Figure 2–47).
Energy-yielding pathways like these, in which organic molecules both donate and accept electrons (and which are often, as in these cases, anaerobic), are called fermentations. Studies of the commercially important fermentations carried out by yeasts inspired much of early biochemistry. Work in the nineteenth century led in 1896 to the then startling recognition that these processes could be studied outside living organisms, in cell extracts. This revolutionary discovery eventually made it possible to dissect out and study each of the individual reactions in the fermentation process. The piecing together of the complete glycolytic pathway in the 1930s was a major triumph of biochemistry, and it was quickly followed by the recognition of the central role of ATP in cell processes.
Glycolysis Illustrates How Enzymes Couple Oxidation to Energy Storage
The formation of ATP during glycolysis provides a particularly clear demonstration of how enzymes couple energetically unfavorable reactions with favorable ones, thereby driving the many chemical reactions that make life possible. Two central reactions in glycolysis (steps 6 and 7) convert the three-carbon sugar intermediate  glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (an aldehyde) into 3-phosphoglycerate (a carboxylic acid; see Panel 2 8, pp. 104–105), thus oxidizing an aldehyde group to a carboxylic acid group. The overall reaction releases enough free energy to convert a molecule of ADP to ATP and to transfer two electrons (and a proton) from the aldehyde to NAD+ to form NADH, while still liberating enough heat to the environment to make the overall reaction energetically favorable (delta G° for the overall reaction is –12.5 kJ per mole).