Oxidation and Reduction Involve Electron Transfers
The cell does not oxidize organic molecules in one step, as occurs when organic material is burned in a fire. Through the use of enzyme catalysts, metabolism takes these molecules through a large number of reactions that only rarely involve the direct addition of oxygen. Before we consider some of these reactions and their purpose, we discuss what is meant by the process of oxidation.
Oxidation refers to more than the addition of oxygen atoms; the term applies more generally to any reaction in which electrons are transferred from one atom to another. Oxidation in this sense refers to the removal of electrons, and reduction—the converse of oxidation—means the addition of electrons. Thus, F e2+ is oxidized if it loses an electron to become F e3+, and a chlorine atom is reduced if it gains an electron to become Cl–. Since the number of electrons is conserved (no loss or gain) in a chemical reaction, oxidation and reduction always occur simultaneously: that is, if one molecule gains an electron in a reaction (reduction), a second molecule loses the electron (oxidation). When a sugar molecule is oxidized to CO2 and H2O, for example, the O2 molecules involved in forming H2O gain electrons and thus are said to have been reduced.
The terms “oxidation” and “reduction” apply even when there is only a partial shift of electrons between atoms linked by a covalent bond (Figure 2–20). When a carbon atom becomes covalently bonded to an atom with a strong affinity for electrons, such as oxygen, chlorine, or sulfur, for example, it gives up more than its equal share of electrons and forms a polar covalent bond. Because the positive charge of the carbon nucleus is now somewhat greater than the negative charge of its electrons, the atom acquires a partial positive charge and is said to be oxidized. Conversely, a carbon atom in a C–H linkage has slightly more than its share of electrons, and so it is said to be reduced.
When a molecule in a cell picks up an electron (e minus), it often picks up a proton (H+) at the same time (protons being freely available in water). The net effect in this case is to add a hydrogen atom to the molecule.
A + e minus + H+ → AH
Even though a proton plus an electron is involved (instead of just an electron), such hydrogenation reactions are reductions, and the reverse, dehydrogenation reactions are oxidations. It is especially easy to tell whether an organic molecule is being oxidized or reduced: reduction is occurring if its number of C–H bonds increases, whereas oxidation is occurring if its number of C–H bonds decreases (see Figure 2–20B).
Cells use enzymes to catalyze the oxidation of organic molecules in small steps, through a sequence of reactions that allows useful energy to be harvested. We now need to explain how enzymes work and some of the constraints under which they operate. 