For each type of macromolecule, an enzyme-catalyzed pathway exists which resembles that discussed previously for the synthesis of the amino acid glutamine (see Figure 2–35). The principle is exactly the same, in that the –OH group that will be removed in the condensation reaction is first activated by becoming involved in a high-energy linkage to a second molecule. However, the actual mechanisms used to link ATP hydrolysis to the synthesis of proteins and polysaccharides are more complex than that used for glutamine synthesis, since a series of high-energy intermediates is required to generate the final high-energy bond that is broken during the condensation step (discussed in Chapter 6 for protein synthesis).
Each activated carrier has limits in its ability to drive a biosynthetic reaction. The delta G for the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) depends on the concentrations of all of the reactants, but under the usual conditions in a cell it is between –46 and –54 kJ per mole. In principle, this hydrolysis reaction could drive an unfavorable reaction with a delta G of, perhaps, +40 kJ per mole, provided that a suitable reaction path is available. For some biosynthetic reactions, however, even –50 kJ per mole does not provide enough of a driving force. In these cases, the path of ATP hydrolysis can be altered so that it initially produces AMP and pyrophosphate (PPi), which is itself then hydrolyzed in a subsequent step (Figure 2–42). The whole process makes available a total free-energy change of about –100 kJ per mole. An important type of biosynthetic reaction that is driven in this way is the synthesis of nucleic acids (polynucleotides) from nucleoside triphosphates, as illustrated on the right side of Figure 2–43.
Note that the repetitive condensation reactions that produce macromolecules can be oriented in one of two ways, giving rise to either the head polymerization or the tail polymerization of monomers. In so-called head polymerization, the reactive bond required for the condensation reaction is carried on the end of the growing polymer, and it must therefore be regenerated each time that a monomer is added. In this case, each monomer brings with it the reactive bond that will be used in adding the next monomer in the series. In tail polymerization, the reactive bond carried by each monomer is instead used immediately for its own addition (Figure 2–44).
We shall see in later chapters that both of these types of polymerization are used. The synthesis of polynucleotides and some simple polysaccharides occurs by tail polymerization, for example, whereas the synthesis of proteins occurs by a head polymerization process.