Summary
Living cells need to create and maintain order within themselves to survive and grow. This is thermodynamically possible only because of a continual input of energy, part of which must be released from the cells to their environment as heat that disorders the surroundings. The only chemical reactions possible are those that increase the total amount of disorder in the universe. The free-energy change for a reaction, delta G, measures this disorder, and it must be less than zero for a reaction to proceed spontaneously. This ∆G depends both on the intrinsic properties of the reacting molecules and their concentrations, and it can be calculated from these concentrations if either the equilibrium constant (K) for the reaction or its standard free-energy change, delta G°, is known.
The energy needed for life comes ultimately from the electromagnetic radiation of the sun, which drives the formation of organic molecules in photosynthetic organisms such as green plants. Animals obtain their energy by eating organic molecules and oxidizing them in a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions that are coupled to the formation of ATP—a common currency of energy in all cells.
To make possible the continual generation of order in cells, energetically favorable reactions, such as the hydrolysis of ATP, are coupled to energetically unfavorable reactions. In the biosynthesis of macromolecules, ATP is used to form reactive phosphorylated intermediates. Because the energetically unfavorable reaction of biosynthesis now becomes energetically favorable, ATP hydrolysis is said to drive the reaction. Polymeric molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides are assembled from small activated precursor molecules by repetitive condensation reactions that are driven in this way. Other reactive molecules, called either activated carriers or coenzymes, transfer other chemical groups in the course of biosynthesis: NADPH transfers hydrogen as a proton plus two electrons (a hydride ion), for example, whereas acetyl CoA transfers an acetyl group.
HOW CELLS OBTAIN ENERGY FROM FOOD
The constant supply of energy that cells need to generate and maintain the biological order that keeps them alive comes from the chemical-bond energy in food molecules.
The proteins, lipids, and polysaccharides that make up most of the food we eat must be broken down into smaller molecules before our cells can use them—either as a source of energy or as building blocks for other molecules. Enzymatic digestion breaks down the large polymeric molecules in food into their monomer subunits—proteins into amino acids, polysaccharides into sugars, and fats into fatty acids and glycerol. After digestion, the small organic molecules derived from food enter the cytosol of cells, where their gradual oxidation begins.