Living cells—by surviving, growing, and forming complex organisms—are generating order and thus might appear to defy the second law of thermodynamics. How is this possible? The answer is that a cell is not an isolated system: it takes in energy from its environment in the form of food, or as photons from the sun (or even, as in some chemosynthetic bacteria, from inorganic molecules alone). It then uses this energy to generate order within itself. In the course of the chemical reactions that generate order, the cell converts part of the energy it uses into heat. The heat is discharged into the cell’s environment and disorders the surroundings. As a result, the total entropy—that of the cell plus its surroundings—increases, as demanded by the second law of thermodynamics.
To understand the principles governing these energy conversions, think of a cell surrounded by a sea of matter representing the rest of the universe. As the cell lives and grows, it creates internal order. But it constantly releases heat energy as it synthesizes molecules and assembles them into cell structures. Heat is energy in its most disordered form—the random jostling of molecules. When the cell releases heat to the sea, it increases the intensity of molecular motions there (thermal motion)—thereby increasing the randomness, or disorder, of the sea. The second law of thermodynamics is satisfied because the increase in the amount of order inside the cell is always more than compensated for by an even greater decrease in order (increase in entropy) in the surrounding sea of matter (Figure 2–16).
Where does the heat that the cell releases come from? Here we encounter another important law of thermodynamics. The first law of thermodynamics states that energy can be converted from one form to another, but that it cannot be created or destroyed. Figure 2–17 illustrates some interconversions between different forms of energy. The amount of energy in different forms will change as a result of the chemical reactions inside the cell, but the first law tells us that the total amount of energy must always be the same. For example, an animal cell takes in foodstuffs and converts some of the energy present in the chemical bonds between the atoms of these food molecules (chemical-bond energy) into the random thermal motion of molecules (heat energy).