How Enzymes Find Their Substrates: The Enormous Rapidity of Molecular Motions
An enzyme will often catalyze the reaction of thousands of substrate molecules every second. This means that it must be able to bind a new substrate molecule in a fraction of a millisecond. But both enzymes and their substrates are present in relatively small numbers in a cell. How do they find each other so fast? Rapid binding is possible because the motions caused by heat energy are enormously fast at the molecular level. These molecular motions can be classified broadly into three kinds: (1) the movement of a molecule from one place to another (translational motion), (2) the rapid back-and-forth movement of covalently linked atoms with respect to one another (vibrations), and (3) rotations. All of these motions help to bring the surfaces of interacting molecules together.
The rates of molecular motions can be measured by a variety of spectroscopic techniques. A large globular protein is constantly tumbling, rotating about its axis about a million times per second. Molecules are also in constant translational motion, which causes them to explore the space inside the cell very efficiently by wandering through it—a process called diffusion. In this way, every molecule in a cell collides with a huge number of other molecules each second. As the molecules in a liquid collide and bounce off one another, an individual molecule moves first one way and then another, its path constituting a random walk (Figure 2–26). In such a walk, the average net distance that each molecule travels (as the “crow flies”) from its starting point is proportional to the square root of the time involved: that is, if it takes a molecule 1 second on average to travel 1 μm, it takes 4 seconds to travel 2 μm, 100 seconds to travel 10 μm, and so on.
The inside of a cell is very crowded (Figure 2–27). Nevertheless, experiments in which fluorescent dyes and other labeled molecules are injected into cells show that small organic molecules diffuse through the watery gel of the cytosol nearly as rapidly as they do through water. A small organic molecule, for example, takes only about one-fifth of a second on average to diffuse a distance of 10 μm. Diffusion is therefore an efficient way for small molecules to move the limited distances in the cell (a typical animal cell is 15 μm in diameter).