Since enzymes move more slowly than substrates in cells, we can think of them as sitting still. The rate of encounter of each enzyme molecule with its substrate will depend on the concentration of the substrate molecule. For example, some abundant substrates are present at a concentration of 0.5 mM. Since pure water is 55.5 M, there is only about one such substrate molecule in the cell for every 105 water molecules. Nevertheless, the active site on an enzyme molecule that binds this substrate will be bombarded by about 500,000 random collisions with the substrate molecule per second. (For a substrate concentration tenfold lower, the number of collisions drops to 50,000 per second, and so on.) A random collision between the active site of an enzyme and the matching surface of its substrate molecule often leads immediately to the formation of an enzyme–substrate complex. A reaction in which a covalent bond is broken or formed can now occur extremely rapidly. When one appreciates how quickly molecules move and react, the observed rates of enzymatic catalysis do not seem so amazing.
Two molecules that are held together by noncovalent bonds can also dissociate. The multiple weak noncovalent bonds that they form with each other will persist until random thermal motion causes the two molecules to separate. In general, the stronger the binding of the enzyme and substrate, the slower their rate of dissociation. In contrast, whenever two colliding molecules have poorly matching surfaces, they form few noncovalent bonds and the total energy of association will be negligible compared with that of thermal motion. In this case, the two molecules dissociate as rapidly as they come together, preventing incorrect and unwanted associations between mismatched molecules, such as between an enzyme and the wrong substrate.
The Free-Energy Change for a Reaction, delta G, Determines Whether It Can Occur Spontaneously
Although enzymes speed up reactions, they cannot by themselves force energetically unfavorable reactions to occur. In terms of a water analogy, enzymes by themselves cannot make water run uphill. Cells, however, must do just that in order to grow and divide: they must build highly ordered and energy-rich molecules from small and simple ones. We shall see that this is done through enzymes that directly couple energetically favorable reactions, which release energy and produce heat, to energetically unfavorable reactions, which produce biological order.