The Citric Acid Cycle Generates NADH by Oxidizing Acetyl Groups to CO2
In the nineteenth century, biologists noticed that in the absence of air cells produce lactic acid (for example, in muscle) or ethanol (for example, in yeast), while in its presence they consume O2 and produce CO2 and H2O. Efforts to define the pathways of aerobic metabolism eventually focused on the oxidation of pyruvate and led in 1937 to the discovery of the citric acid cycle, also known as the tricarboxylic acid cycle or the Krebs cycle. The citric acid cycle accounts for about two-thirds of the total oxidation of carbon compounds in most cells, and its major end products are CO2 and high-energy electrons in the form of NADH. The CO2 is released as a waste product, while the high-energy electrons from NADH are passed to a membrane-bound electron-transport chain (discussed in Chapter 14), eventually combining with O2 to produce H2O. The citric acid cycle itself does not use gaseous O2 (it uses oxygen atoms from H2O). But the cycle does require O2 in subsequent reactions to keep it going. This is because there is no other efficient way for the NADH to get rid of its electrons and thus regenerate the NAD+ that is needed.
The citric acid cycle takes place inside mitochondria in eukaryotic cells. It results in the complete oxidation of the carbon atoms of the acetyl groups in acetyl CoA, converting them into CO2. But the acetyl group is not oxidized directly. Instead, this group is transferred from acetyl CoA to a larger, four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form the six-carbon tricarboxylic acid, citric acid, for which the subsequent cycle of reactions is named. The citric acid molecule is then gradually oxidized, allowing the energy of this oxidation to be harnessed to produce energy-rich activated carrier molecules. The chain of eight reactions forms a cycle because at the end the oxaloacetate is regenerated and enters a new turn of the cycle, as shown in outline in Figure 2–57.
We have thus far discussed only one of the three types of activated carrier molecules that are produced by the citric acid cycle; NADH, the reduced form of the NAD+/NADH electron carrier system (see Figure 2–36). In addition to three molecules of NADH, each turn of the cycle also produces one molecule of FADH2 (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide) from FAD (see Figure 2–39), and one molecule of the ribonucleoside triphosphate GTP from GDP. The structure of GTP is illustrated in Figure 2–58. GTP is a close relative of ATP, and the transfer of its terminal phosphate group to ADP produces one ATP molecule in each cycle. As we discuss shortly, the energy that is stored in the readily transferred electrons of NADH and FADH2 will be utilized subsequently for ATP production through the process of oxidative phosphorylation, the only step in the oxidative catabolism of foodstuffs that directly requires gaseous oxygen (O2) from the atmosphere.