In acetyl CoA, as in other carrier molecules, the transferable group makes up only a small part of the molecule. The rest consists of a large organic portion that serves as a convenient “handle,” facilitating the recognition of the carrier molecule by specific enzymes. As with acetyl CoA, this handle portion very often contains a nucleotide (usually adenosine), a curious fact that may be a relic from an early stage of evolution. It is currently thought that the main catalysts for early life-forms—before DNA or proteins—were RNA molecules (or their close relatives), as described in Chapter 6. It is tempting to speculate that many of the carrier molecules that we find today originated in this earlier RNA world, where their nucleotide portions could have been useful for binding them to RNA enzymes (ribozymes).
Thus, ATP transfers phosphate, NADPH transfers electrons and hydrogen, and acetyl CoA transfers two-carbon acetyl groups. FADH2 (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide) is used like NADH in electron and proton transfers (Figure 2–39). The reactions of other activated carrier molecules involve the transfer of a methyl, carboxyl, or glucose group for biosyntheses (Table 2–3). These activated carriers are generated in reactions that are coupled to ATP hydrolysis, as in the example in Figure 2–40. Therefore, the energy that enables their groups to be used for biosynthesis ultimately comes from the catabolic reactions that generate ATP. Similar processes occur in the synthesis of the very large molecules of the cell—the nucleic acids, proteins, and polysaccharides—that we discuss next.
The Synthesis of Biological Polymers Is Driven by ATP Hydrolysis
As discussed previously, the macromolecules of the cell constitute most of its dry mass (see Figure 2–7). These molecules are made from subunits (or monomers) that are linked together in a condensation reaction, in which the constituents of a water molecule (OH plus H) are removed from the two reactants. Consequently, the reverse reaction—the breakdown of all three types of polymers—occurs by the enzyme-catalyzed addition of water (hydrolysis). This hydrolysis reaction is energetically favorable, whereas the biosynthetic reactions require an energy input (see Figure 2–9).
The nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), proteins, and polysaccharides are all polymers that are produced by the repeated addition of a monomer onto one end of a growing chain. The synthesis reactions for these three types of macromolecules are outlined in Figure 2–41. As indicated, the condensation step in each case depends on energy from nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis. And yet, except for the nucleic acids, there are no phosphate groups left in the final product molecules. How are the reactions that release the energy of ATP hydrolysis coupled to polymer synthesis?