Most of the dry mass of a cell consists of macromolecules that have been produced as linear polymers of amino acids (proteins) or nucleotides (DNA and RNA), covalently linked to each other in an exact order. Most of the protein molecules and many of the RNAs fold into a unique conformation that is determined by their sequence of subunits. This folding process creates unique surfaces, and it depends on a large set of weak attractions produced by noncovalent forces between atoms. These forces are of four types: electrostatic attractions, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals attractions, and an interaction between nonpolar groups caused by their hydrophobic expulsion from water. The same set of weak forces governs the specific binding of other molecules to macromolecules, making possible the myriad associations between biological molecules that produce the structure and the chemistry of a cell.
Catalysis and the Use of Energy by Cells
One property of living things above all makes them seem almost miraculously different from nonliving matter: they create and maintain order, in a universe that is tending always to greater disorder (Figure 2–12). To create this order, the cells in a living organism must perform a never-ending stream of chemical reactions. In some of these reactions, small organic molecules—amino acids, sugars, nucleotides, and lipids—are being taken apart or modified to supply the many other small molecules that the cell requires. In other reactions, small molecules are being used to construct an enormously diverse range of proteins, nucleic acids, and other macromolecules that endow living systems with all of their most distinctive properties. Each cell can be viewed as a tiny chemical factory, performing many millions of reactions every second.
Cell Metabolism Is Organized by Enzymes
The chemical reactions that a cell carries out would normally occur only at much higher temperatures than those existing inside cells. For this reason, each reaction requires a specific boost in chemical reactivity. This requirement is crucial, because it allows the cell to control its chemistry. The control is exerted through specialized biological catalysts. These are almost always proteins called enzymes, although RNA catalysts also exist, called ribozymes. Each enzyme accelerates, or catalyzes, just one of the many possible kinds of reactions that a particular molecule might undergo. Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are connected in series, so that the product of one reaction becomes the starting material, or substrate, for the next (Figure 2–13). Long linear reaction pathways are in turn linked to one another, forming a maze of interconnected reactions that enable the cell to survive, grow, and reproduce.