What do cell biologists mean by the term “energetically favorable,” and how can this be quantified? According to the second law of thermodynamics the universe tends toward maximum disorder (largest entropy or greatest probability). Thus, a chemical reaction can proceed spontaneously only if it results in a net increase in the disorder of the universe (see Figure 2–16). This disorder of the universe can be expressed most conveniently in terms of the free energy of a system, a concept we touched on earlier.
Free energy, G, is an expression of the energy available to do work—for example, the work of driving chemical reactions. The value of G is of interest only when a system undergoes a change, denoted delta G (delta G). The change in G is critical because, as explained in Panel 2–7 (pp. 102–103), delta G is a direct measure of the amount of disorder created in the universe when a reaction takes place. Energetically favorable reactions, by definition, are those that decrease free energy; in other words, they have a negative delta G and disorder the universe (Figure 2–28).
An example of an energetically favorable reaction on a macroscopic scale is the “reaction” by which a compressed spring relaxes to an expanded state, releasing its stored elastic energy as heat to its surroundings; an example on a microscopic scale is salt dissolving in water. Conversely, energetically unfavorable reactions with a positive delta G—such as the joining of two amino acids to form a peptide bond—by themselves create order in the universe. Therefore, these reactions can take place only if they are coupled to a second reaction with a negative delta G so large that the delta G of the overall process is negative (Figure 2–29).
The Concentration of Reactants Influences the Free-Energy Change and a Reaction’s Direction
As we have just described, a reaction Y in equilibrium with X will go in the direction Y produces X when the associated free-energy change, delta G, is negative, just as a tensed spring left to itself will relax and lose its stored energy to its surroundings as heat. For a chemical reaction, however, delta G depends not only on the energy stored in each individual molecule, but also on the concentrations of the molecules in the reaction mixture. Remember that delta G reflects the degree to which a reaction creates a more disordered—in other words, a more probable—state of the universe. Recalling our coin analogy, it is very likely that a coin will flip from a head to a tail orientation if a jiggling box contains 90 heads and 10 tails, but this is a less probable event if the box has 10 heads and 90 tails.
The same is true for a chemical reaction. For a reversible reaction Y produces X, a large excess of Y over X will tend to drive the reaction in the direction Y produces X. Therefore, as the ratio of Y to X increases, the delta G becomes more negative for the transition Y produces X (and more positive for the transition X produces Y).