Amino acids not used in biosynthesis can be oxidized to generate metabolic energy. Most of their carbon and hydrogen atoms eventually form CO2 or H2O, whereas their nitrogen atoms are shuttled through various forms and eventually appear as urea, which is excreted. Each amino acid is processed differently, and a whole constellation of enzymatic reactions exists for their catabolism.
Sulfur is abundant on Earth in its most oxidized form, sulfate (S O4 2 minus). To be useful for life, sulfate must be reduced to sulfide (S2 minus), the oxidation state of sulfur required for the synthesis of essential biological molecules, including the amino acids methionine and cysteine, coenzyme A (see Figure 2–39), and the iron-sulfur centers essential for electron transport (see Figure 14–16). The sulfur-reduction process begins in bacteria, fungi, and plants, where a special group of enzymes use ATP and reducing power to create a sulfate assimilation pathway. Humans and other animals cannot reduce sulfate and must therefore acquire the sulfur they need for their metabolism in the food that they eat.
Metabolism Is Highly Organized and Regulated
One gets a sense of the intricacy of a cell as a chemical machine from the relation of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle to the other metabolic pathways sketched out in Figure 2–63. This chart represents only some of the enzymatic pathways in a human cell. It is obvious that our discussion of cell metabolism has dealt with only a tiny fraction of the broad field of cell chemistry.
All these reactions occur in a cell that is less than 0.1 mm in diameter, and each requires a different enzyme. As is clear from Figure 2–63, the same molecule can often be part of many different pathways. Pyruvate, for example, is a substrate for half a dozen or more different enzymes, each of which modifies it chemically in a different way. One enzyme converts pyruvate to acetyl CoA, another to oxaloacetate; a third enzyme changes pyruvate to the amino acid alanine, a fourth to lactate, and so on. All of these different pathways compete for the same pyruvate molecule, and similar competitions for thousands of other small molecules go on at the same time.
The situation is further complicated in a multicellular organism. Different cell types will in general require somewhat different sets of enzymes. And different tissues make distinct contributions to the chemistry of the organism as a whole. In addition to differences in specialized products such as hormones or antibodies, there are significant differences in the “common” metabolic pathways among various types of cells in the same organism.