The four types of noncovalent interactions important in biological molecules were presented earlier, and they are discussed further in Panel 2 3 (pp. 94–95). In addition to folding biological macromolecules into unique shapes, they can also add up to create a strong attraction between two different molecules (see Figure 2–3). This form of molecular interaction provides for great specificity, inasmuch as the close multipoint contacts required for strong binding make it possible for a macromolecule to select out—through binding—just one of the many thousands of other types of molecules present inside a cell. Moreover, because the strength of the binding depends on the number of noncovalent bonds that are formed, interactions of almost any affinity are possible—allowing rapid dissociation where appropriate.
As we discuss next, binding of this type underlies all biological catalysis, making it possible for proteins to function as enzymes. In addition, noncovalent interactions allow macromolecules to be used as building blocks for the formation of larger structures, thereby forming intricate machines with multiple moving parts that perform such complex tasks as DNA replication and protein synthesis (Figure 2–11).
Summary
Living organisms are autonomous, self-propagating chemical systems. They are formed from a distinctive and restricted set of small carbon-based molecules that are essentially the same for every living species. Each of these small molecules is composed of a small set of atoms linked to each other in a precise configuration through covalent bonds. The main categories are sugars, fatty acids, amino acids, and nucleotides. Sugars are a primary source of chemical energy for cells and can be incorporated into polysaccharides for energy storage. Fatty acids are also important for energy storage, but their most critical function is in the formation of cell membranes. Long chains of amino acids form the remarkably diverse and versatile macromolecules known as proteins. Nucleotides play a central part in energy transfer, while also serving as the subunits for the informational macromolecules, RNA and DNA.