Panel 2 9 (pp. 106–107) and Movie 2.6 present the complete citric acid cycle. Water, rather than molecular oxygen, supplies the extra oxygen atoms required to make CO2 from the acetyl groups entering the citric acid cycle. As illustrated in the panel, three molecules of water are split in each cycle, and the oxygen atoms of some of them are ultimately used to make CO2.
In addition to pyruvate and fatty acids, some amino acids pass from the cytosol into mitochondria, where they are also converted into acetyl CoA or one of the other intermediates of the citric acid cycle. Thus, in the eukaryotic cell, the mitochondrion is the center toward which all energy-yielding processes lead, whether they begin with sugars, fats, or proteins.
Both the citric acid cycle and glycolysis also function as starting points for important biosynthetic reactions by producing vital carbon-containing intermediates, such as oxaloacetate and α-ketoglutarate. Some of these substances produced by catabolism are transferred back from the mitochondria to the cytosol, where they serve in anabolic reactions as precursors for the synthesis of many essential molecules, such as amino acids (Figure 2–59).
Electron Transport Drives the Synthesis of the Majority of the ATP in Most Cells
Most chemical energy is released in the last stage in the degradation of a food molecule. In this final process, NADH and FADH2 transfer the electrons that they gained when oxidizing food-derived organic molecules to the electron-transport chain, which is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion (see Figure 14–10). As the electrons pass along this long chain of specialized electron acceptor and donor molecules, they fall to successively lower energy states. The energy that the electrons release in this process pumps H+ ions (protons) across the membrane—from the innermost mitochondrial compartment (the matrix) to the intermembrane space (and then to the cytosol)—generating a gradient of H+ ions (Figure 2–60). This gradient serves as a major source of energy for cells, being tapped like a battery to drive a variety of energy-requiring reactions. The most prominent of these reactions is the generation of ATP by the phosphorylation of ADP. 
At the end of this series of electron transfers, the electrons are passed to molecules of oxygen gas (O2) that have diffused into the mitochondrion, which simultaneously combine with protons (H+) from the surrounding solution to produce water. The electrons have now reached a low energy level, and all the available energy has been extracted from the oxidized food molecule. This process, termed oxidative phosphorylation (Figure 2–61), also occurs in the plasma membrane of bacteria. As one of the most remarkable achievements of cell evolution, it is a central topic of Chapter 14.