The chemistry in a living cell is tightly controlled, because the kick over energy barriers is greatly aided by a specialized class of proteins—the enzymes. Each enzyme binds tightly to one or more molecules, called substrates, and holds them in a way that greatly reduces the activation energy of a particular chemical reaction that the bound substrates can undergo. A substance that can lower the activation energy of a reaction is termed a catalyst; catalysts increase the rate of chemical reactions because they allow a much larger proportion of the random collisions with surrounding molecules to kick the substrates over the energy barrier, as illustrated in Figure 2–22. Enzymes are among the most effective catalysts known: some are capable of speeding up reactions by factors of 1014 or more. Enzymes thereby allow reactions that would not otherwise occur to proceed rapidly at normal temperatures.
Enzymes Can Drive Substrate Molecules Along Specific Reaction Pathways
An enzyme cannot change the equilibrium point for a reaction. The reason is simple: when an enzyme (or any catalyst) lowers the activation energy for the reaction Y produces X, of necessity it also lowers the activation energy for the reaction X produces Y by exactly the same amount (see Figure 2–21). The forward and backward reactions will therefore be accelerated by the same factor by an enzyme, and the equilibrium point for the reaction will be unchanged (Figure 2–23). Thus no matter how much an enzyme speeds up a reaction, it cannot change its direction. Despite the above limitation, enzymes steer all of the reactions in cells through specific reaction paths. This is because enzymes are both highly selective and very precise, usually catalyzing only one particular reaction. In other words, each enzyme selectively lowers the activation energy of only one of the several possible chemical reactions that its bound substrate molecules could undergo. In this way, sets of enzymes can direct each of the many different molecules in a cell along a particular reaction pathway (Figure 2–24).
The success of living organisms is attributable to a cell’s ability to make enzymes of many types, each with precisely specified properties. Each enzyme has a unique shape containing an active site, a pocket or groove in the enzyme into which only particular substrates will fit (Figure 2–25). Like all other catalysts, enzyme molecules themselves remain unchanged after participating in a reaction and therefore can function over and over again. In Chapter 3, we discuss further how enzymes work.