Four Types of noncovalent Attractions Help Bring Molecules Together in Cells
Much of biology depends on the specific binding of different molecules caused by three types of noncovalent bonds: electrostatic attractions (ionic bonds), hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals attractions; and on a fourth factor that can push molecules together: the hydrophobic force. The properties of the four types of noncovalent attractions are presented in Panel 2 3 (pp. 94–95). Although each individual noncovalent attraction would be much too weak to be effective in the face of thermal motions, their energies can sum to create a strong force between two separate molecules. Thus sets of noncovalent attractions often allow the complementary surfaces of two macromolecules to hold those two macromolecules together (Figure 2–3).
Table 2–1 compares noncovalent bond strengths to that of a typical covalent bond, both in the presence and in the absence of water. Note that, by forming competing interactions with the involved molecules, water greatly reduces the strength of both electrostatic attractions and hydrogen bonds.
The structure of a typical hydrogen bond is illustrated in Figure 2–4. This bond represents a special form of polar interaction in which an electropositive hydrogen atom is shared by two electronegative atoms. Its hydrogen can be viewed as a proton that has partially dissociated from a donor atom, allowing it to be shared by a second acceptor atom. Unlike a typical electrostatic interaction, this bond is highly directional—being strongest when a straight line can be drawn between all three of the involved atoms.
The fourth effect that often brings molecules together in water is not, strictly speaking, a bond at all. However, a very important hydrophobic force is caused by a pushing of nonpolar surfaces out of the hydrogen-bonded water network, where they would otherwise physically interfere with the highly favorable interactions between water molecules. Bringing any two nonpolar surfaces together reduces their contact with water; in this sense, the force is nonspecific. Nevertheless, we shall see in Chapter 3 that hydrophobic forces are central to the proper folding of protein molecules.