The synthesis and degradation of glycogen are rapidly regulated according to need. When cells need more ATP than they can generate from the food molecules taken in from the bloodstream, they break down glycogen in a reaction that produces glucose 1-phosphate, which is rapidly converted to glucose 6-phosphate for glycolysis (Figure 2–52).
Quantitatively, fat is far more important than glycogen as an energy store for animals, presumably because it provides for more efficient storage. The oxidation of a gram of fat releases about twice as much energy as the oxidation of a gram of glycogen. Moreover, glycogen differs from fat in binding a great deal of water, producing a sixfold difference in the actual mass of glycogen required to store the same amount of energy as fat. An average adult human stores enough glycogen for only about a day of normal activities, but enough fat to last for nearly a month. If our main fuel reservoir had to be carried as glycogen instead of fat, body weight would increase by an average of about 60 pounds.
The sugar and ATP needed by plant cells are largely produced in separate organelles: sugars in chloroplasts (the organelles specialized for photosynthesis), and ATP in mitochondria. Although plants produce abundant amounts of both ATP and NADPH in their chloroplasts, this organelle is isolated from the rest of its plant cell by a membrane that is impermeable to both types of activated carrier molecules. Moreover, the plant contains many cells—such as those in the roots— that lack chloroplasts and therefore cannot produce their own sugars. Thus, sugars are exported from chloroplasts to the mitochondria present in all cells of the plant. Most of the ATP needed for general plant cell metabolism is synthesized in these mitochondria, using exactly the same pathways for the oxidative breakdown of sugars as in nonphotosynthetic organisms; this ATP is then passed to the rest of the cell (see Figure 14–42).
During periods of excess photosynthetic capacity during the day, chloroplasts convert some of the sugars that they make into fats and into starch, a polymer of glucose analogous to the glycogen of animals. The fats in plants are triacyl-glycerols (triglycerides), just like the fats in animals, and differ only in the types of fatty acids that predominate. Fat and starch are both stored inside the chloroplast until needed for energy-yielding oxidation during periods of darkness (see Figure 2–51C).
The embryos inside plant seeds must live on stored sources of energy for a prolonged period, until they germinate and produce leaves that can harvest the energy in sunlight. For this reason plant seeds often contain especially large amounts of fats and starch—which makes them a major food source for animals, including ourselves (Figure 2–53).