The cell cannot derive any benefit from the heat energy it releases unless the heat-generating reactions inside the cell are directly linked to the processes that generate molecular order. It is the tight coupling of heat production to an increase in order that distinguishes the metabolism of a cell from the wasteful burning of fuel in a fire. Later, we illustrate how this coupling occurs. For now, it is sufficient to recognize that a direct linkage of the “controlled burning” of food molecules to the generation of biological order is required for cells to create and maintain an island of order in a universe tending toward chaos.
Cells Obtain Energy by the Oxidation of Organic Molecules
All animal and plant cells are powered by energy stored in the chemical bonds of organic molecules, whether they are sugars that a plant has photosynthesized as food for itself or the mixture of large and small molecules that an animal has eaten. Organisms must extract this energy in usable form to live, grow, and reproduce. In both plants and animals, energy is extracted from food molecules by a process of gradual oxidation, or controlled burning.
The Earth’s atmosphere contains a great deal of oxygen, and in the presence of oxygen the most energetically stable form of carbon is CO2 and that of hydrogen is H2O. A cell is therefore able to obtain energy from sugars or other organic molecules by allowing their carbon and hydrogen atoms to combine with oxygen to produce CO2 and H2O, respectively—a process called aerobic respiration.
Photosynthesis (discussed in detail in Chapter 14) and respiration are complementary processes (Figure 2–18). This means that the transactions between plants and animals are not all one way. Plants, animals, and microorganisms have existed together on this planet for so long that many of them have become an essential part of the others’ environments. The oxygen released by photosynthesis is consumed in the combustion of organic molecules during aerobic respiration. And some of the CO2 molecules that are fixed today into organic molecules by photosynthesis in a green leaf were yesterday released into the atmosphere by the respiration of an animal—or by the respiration of a fungus or bacterium decomposing dead organic matter. We therefore see that carbon utilization forms a huge cycle that involves the biosphere (all of the living organisms on Earth) as a whole (Figure 2–19). Similarly, atoms of nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur move between the living and nonliving worlds in cycles that involve plants, animals, fungi, and bacteria.