The opposite of an acid is a base. Any molecule capable of accepting a proton from a water molecule is called a base. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is basic (the term alkaline is also used) because it dissociates readily in aqueous solution to form Na+ ions and OH minus ions. Because of this property, NaOH is called a strong base. More important in living cells, however, are the weak bases—those that have a weak tendency to reversibly accept a proton from water. Many biologically important molecules contain an amino (NH2) group. This group is a weak base that can generate OH minus by taking a proton from water: –NH2 + H2O →–NH3+ + OH minus (see Panel 2 2, pp. 92–93).
Because an OH minus ion combines with a H3O+ ion to form two water molecules, an increase in the OH minus concentration forces a decrease in the concentration of H3O+, and vice versa. A pure solution of water contains an equal concentration (10–7 M) of both ions, rendering it neutral. The interior of a cell is also kept close to neutrality by the presence of buffers: weak acids and bases that can release or take up protons near pH 7, keeping the environment of the cell relatively constant under a variety of conditions.
A Cell Is Formed from Carbon Compounds
Having reviewed the ways atoms combine into molecules and how these molecules behave in an aqueous environment, we now examine the main classes of small molecules found in cells. We shall see that a few categories of molecules, formed from a handful of different elements, give rise to all the extraordinary richness of form and behavior shown by living things.
If we disregard water and inorganic ions such as potassium, nearly all the molecules in a cell are based on carbon. Carbon is outstanding among all the elements in its ability to form large molecules; silicon is a poor second. Because carbon is small and has four electrons and four vacancies in its outermost shell, a carbon atom can form four covalent bonds with other atoms. Most important, one carbon atom can join to other carbon atoms through highly stable covalent C–C bonds to form chains and rings and hence generate large and complex molecules with no obvious upper limit to their size. The carbon compounds made by cells are called organic molecules. In contrast, all other molecules, including water, are said to be inorganic.
Certain combinations of atoms, such as the methyl (–CH3), hydroxyl (–OH), carboxyl (–COOH), carbonyl (–CO), phosphate (–PO3 2 minus), sulfhydryl (–SH), and amino (–NH2) groups, occur repeatedly in the molecules made by cells. Each such chemical group has distinct chemical and physical properties that influence the behavior of the molecule in which the group occurs. The most common chemical groups and some of their properties are summarized in Panel 2 1, pp. 90–91.